Electroencephalography (EEG) is a method of testing electrical signals in the brain. It is often applied as a technique for data analysis such as time and frequency series analysis. The brain’s neurons contain ionic current, which creates voltage fluctuations that EEG can measure. This electrical activity is spontaneous and recorded over a period of time from many scalp electrodes to form an EEG signal. Traditionally, EEG signals are taken on the surface of the scalp, but there also exists iEEG signals, which are taken inside the brain. In this paper, we will be focusing primarily on conventional scalp EEG signals. Conventionally, EEG recordings may be obtained by connecting electrodes to the scalp with the use of a conductive gel. A differential amplifier is then used to amplify each active electrode compared to the reference before it is sent through an anti-aliasing filter. Finally, this filtered signal is converted with an analog-to-digital converter. Clinically, EEG signals are used primarily to diagnose and treat various brain disorders such as epilepsy, tremor, concussions, strokes, and sleep disorders. More recent applications of EEG include using machine learning as a method of analysis. In particular, there is much research on epileptic seizure detection and sleep disorder research in combination with machine learning. Additionally, there is also a growing interest in studying EEG signals for gaming to control and manipulate objects using brainwaves due to EEG monitoring for brain activity during tasks. EEG waveforms vary based on the band, which denotes the frequency range. The delta band is the slowest wave with the highest amplitude, having a frequency range below 4 Hz. For adults, it is located frontally, while for children it is located posteriorly. The theta band is between 4 to 7 Hz and is most common in young children while signifying drowsiness or arousal in adults. This band tends to spike due to an active inhibition of a movement or response. The alpha band is between 8 to 14 Hz, and it is correlated to eye muscle movements. It is located on both sides of the head’s posterior regions. The beta band is above 14 Hz and is correlated with general motor behavior. It is located on both sides of the head’s frontal regions. Some of the advantages of using EEG compared to other techniques to study brain function are low costs, tolerance to motion from subjects, and no radiation exposure risks. Some of the disadvantages of using EEG include low spatial resolution and poor signal-to-noise ratio. As the process of epileptic seizure detection is a bit complicated biomedical situation, it has generated a substantial amount of concerns towards the utilization of machine learning processes as a solution. Most of the recent literature surveys regarding EEG signal analysis have proposed multiple learning models and different artificial neural network algorithms like radial bias function, recurrent neural networks, and vector quantizations to interpret epileptic seizure patterns in a given set of EEG signals. The problem is also being targeted and solved using other models like Support Vector Machines (SVM), adaptive neuro-fuzzy interference system (ANFIS), adaptive learning, and time-frequency analysis. Reviewing the published papers in EEG analysis for epilepsy the following points are considerable. Dimensionality reduction and selection have been identified as an interesting topic for EEG analysis using machine learning methods. Also, wavelet transform and Auto-regressive methods have played a pivotal role in machine learning for EEG such as the following studies. Subasi used wavelet feature extraction for epileptic seizure detection with an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system. The effect of de-noising such as multiscale PCA in EEG analysis is shown. Data preparation methods such as PCA, ICA and, LDA can be used to increase the classification accuracy. Ensemble methods and combining classifiers have shown good performance in EEG analysis such as the following studies. The incorporation of deep learning models in neuroimaging and electrodiagnostic analytics has allowed for large amounts of data to be correlated from multiple modalities. These models have been shown to perform better and faster than current state-of-the-art analysis techniques through both supervised and unsupervised learning tasks. Recent advancements and advantages in using deep learning in EEG analysis can provide more accurate and faster analysis for a large amount of data. Hosseini et al. proposed a cloud-based method for EEG analysis. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been developed for EEG analysis. Optimization modules consisted of PCA, ICA and DSA analysis are developed for CNN and stacked auto-encoder deep learning structures in EEG analysis. The coefficients of the wavelet transform and the numerical autoregressive model are used in recognizing the changes and behaviors in EEG signals. These coefficients are taken as inputs and combined with different machine learning algorithms like multiple layered neural networks, K-means, Support vector machines, K-nearest neighbors, and Naive Bayesian; to break the EEG signal into machine recognizable components, for extracting and determining the power points which are responsible for triggering seizures. As there are multiple techniques involving machine learning for analyzing a given set of EEG signals, it is required to evaluate the best-suited technique for a given application. Each model has a specific use case about the type of application and subject data set. As to our topic of study here, we were concerned about the analysis of waveforms to determine an output. Here we will see how each different ML models can be used for the intended use case: K-NN classifiers can be used for both regression and classification of data, which for our purpose can be used for identifying and classifying different acquired EEG signals and finding the nearest possible output point to the desired classification line for possible detection of abnormality. ANN, on the other hand, has the capability of segregating the physical shape of the EEG waveform and dividing it into segments. These segments are each given a specific weight value accordingly by analyzing the waveform, and the output is determined by subjecting the final equation to a bias. The final chosen bias brings down the output to a desired expected range. As more data is being involved, the number of interactions in the hidden layer will increase. So depending on the type of problem and the amount of data being considered, a suitable selection has to be made while selecting an appropriate process.
