With the support of the rapidly developing information technology infrastructure, online learning is becoming more and more popular and important. At the same time, asynchronous online learning is also the main way for learners to conduct personalized learning and lifelong learning. Different types of educational institutions have set up many online courses which contain digital learning resources and activities on the Learning Management System (LMS) and Massive Online Open Course (MOOC) platform. Because the instructors and learners are separated in time and space in asynchronous online learning, how to analyze the factors that affect learners’ online learning performance is the key problem to improve learners’ online learning performance and design of online courses. In recent years, many researchers have investigated the factors that affect learners’ online learning performance based on constructivism, cognitivism, and other educational and psychological theories. According to these theories, the researchers proposed corresponding hypotheses of effective factors of online learning performance and used correlation analysis, Structural Equation Model (SEM), and other methods to test the proposed hypotheses. Researchers investigated the demographic, cognitive, psychological, behavioral, and other features of learners through questionnaires. The results of previous studies show that the factors affecting learners’ online learning performance include learning motivation, cooperative learning, autonomous learning ability, positive learning emotion, infrastructure and hardware, self-regulation, preparation, personality characteristics, etc. This method of factor analysis has a solid theoretical basis, but identification and analysis rely heavily on the professional quality and manual work of researchers and cannot be used for rapid and real-time analysis in large-scale online learning. On the other hand, digital platforms such as LMS and MOOC that support online learning can automatically record the features and logs of each learner in an incidental manner to generate a big online learning dataset. More and more researchers extract features of learners from these datasets, use nonlinear machine learning models to predict learners’ online learning performance, and investigate the effect of different features on online learning performance. Machine learning models commonly used by researchers include Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines, Naive Bayes, and Artificial Neural Networks. These machine learning models can fit online learning datasets very well and can also achieve high accuracy of prediction for unknown samples. However, nonlinear machine learning models cannot directly generate the diverse impact of features on performance through the weights of features in linear models. They cannot be directly used to analyze the factors that have significant effect on online learning performance. Therefore, by interpreting the process and results of the machine learning models for predicting online learning performance, the effective factors of online learning performance can be analyzed more accurately, and the impact of different factors can be compared fairly. The Shapley value from game theory is the average marginal contribution of a feature’s value in all possible coalitions, which can fairly distribute the difference between the output of the machine learning models and the expected output among features, so the Shapley value of features can be used to compare impact among different features. Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) value is the best Shapley value based on game theory, which is selected as an indicator to represent the impact of different features on the output of machine learning models. Specifically, the main contributions of this study are as follows: First, the framework of analyzing the effective factors of online learning performance by interpreting the machine learning models has been proposed; secondly, SHAP values of different features in online learning performance benchmark datasets are calculated, and the impact and interaction of different factors are compared; thirdly, the representative samples in the benchmark datasets are selected through the K-Medoids clustering algorithm, and differences of effective factors of learners with the same performance are analyzed. The following section of this paper is organized as follows. Related works are listed and discussed in Section II. The framework for analyzing the effective factors of online learning performance by interpreting machine learning models is proposed and explained in Section III. The analysis results of the four benchmark datasets are presented in Section IV. Discussion of analysis results is presented in Section V. The conclusion and limitations of this study are included in Section VI. The main purpose of this research is to interpret the process and results of nonlinear machine learning model’s output by using different features’ marginal effects on the output, and analyze the impact and interaction of different factors. In this research, we propose a framework of using nonlinear machine learning models to fit online learning datasets and interpret machine learning models based on SHAP values. The results show that nonlinear machine learning models, especially Decision Regression, can fit online learning performance datasets better than traditional linear modes. In other words, these models can better reveal the nonlinear relationship between effective factors and online learning performance. Learners’ online learning performance is often significantly affected by a few features, and factors of online learning behavior have a greater impact than demographic, academic background, online curriculum design, and other factors. Different online learning behavior features have additional interaction impact on online learning performance. There is a very obvious positive correlation between factors of online learning behavior and online learning performance, while demographic factors of learners and online course design factors have similar impact on a group of learners. The effective factors of learners with medium performance are diverse, and the most important way to improve learners’ online learning performance is to make them more actively participate in online learning activities. At the same time, online learning behavior features are more suitable for predicting learners’ performance. This research provides a valuable contribution to analyze the effective factors of online learning performance and predict learners’ online learning performance using machine learning models. This research has some limitations. First of all, four benchmark datasets we used are passively collected by extracting from logs of LMS rather than collected datasets under the guidance of learning theories actively. These datasets contain a small number of features and are not comprehensive enough. Secondly, SHAP-based analysis results lack robustness as it is dependent on the training data. In addition, nonlinear machine learning models are still seen as a black box; the mechanism of effective factors and causal relationships were not thoroughly investigated. In the future, under the guidance of cognitivism and constructivism, we will take the initiative to collect more comprehensive datasets for analysis, and use inferential machine learning to analyze the causal relationships between different factors more intrinsically.
