
Falls caused by balance impairments lead to loss of mobility, anxiety, and reduced quality of life. Balance training programs can improve balance in people with balance deficits (e.g., vestibular disorders, Parkinson’s disease, stroke). Physical therapists (PTs) use more than 200 static standing, dynamic standing, and gait balance exercises as part of rehabilitation programs, with levels of difficulty ranging from easy to hard. Balance exercises are generated by varying the stance, visual inputs, standing surface, and head motion. In clinics, PTs select and customize balance exercises for each individual. Individuals typically either refer to instructions previously provided by PTs in the clinic or paper-based instructions when performing exercises at home. However, due to the lack of supervision and consequent loss of motivation, in-home training is not as effective as in-clinic training, and therefore does not lead to the same improvements in balance-related functional outcomes. To improve the effectiveness of in-home balance training, researchers have introduced remote supervision (e.g., telerehabilitation), sensory augmentation (e.g., video game–based balance training), and/or semi-supervision (e.g., wearable devices with periodic expert input). Telerehabilitation delivers remote rehabilitation services, including assessments and interventions, via telecommunication networks. Cikajlo et al. showed that for people with stroke, telerehabilitation with virtual reality tasks led to balance improvements similar to those associated with conventional in-clinic balance training. Telerehabilitation, however, generally requires remote interactions between the expert and user for the duration of the training session via video conference, which can result in longer PT consultation times. Video game–based in-home balance training has been shown to improve clinical measures after a minimum of five weeks of training. Kinetic or kinematic data are collected using balance platforms (e.g., Wii Fit balance board) or video cameras with depth sensors (e.g., Kinect) and a display screen to provide visual cues of balance. Although visual cues are effective for a large number of rehabilitation exercises, there are a subset of rehabilitation exercises that are performed with eyes closed and/or head movements. Additionally, balance platforms such as the Wii Fit balance board constrain the types of stance positions that can be performed. Recently, Bao et al. demonstrated improvements in clinical balance outcomes using a semi-supervised balance training protocol for older adults in their homes; both the experimental group that received vibrotactile sensory augmentation during balance training via a smartphone balance trainer and a control group that performed the exercises unaided showed significant improvements in clinical outcomes. PTs remotely determined exercise progression by reviewing participant data on a weekly basis, and prescribed exercises for the following week based on the number of step-outs from the correct position and participant self-assessments on a 1-5 scale. However, participant self-assessments may not align with PT assessments. This misalignment can affect the appropriateness of selected exercises and limit the overall effectiveness of a balance training program. Appropriate progression of balance exercises within a balance-training regimen is critical to achieving improvements in balance for both clinic- and home-based settings. The extent to which the human (here, the expert/PT) is “in the loop” is diminished as one shifts from a telerehabilitation to a semi-supervised balance training program paradigm. The use of machine learning (ML) techniques could further support home-based balance rehabilitation training. Recently, researchers have demonstrated the utility of ML in supporting clinical assessments of gait based on body motion. Using motion data from wearable sensors, researchers have successfully leveraged ML techniques to identify activity, mine gait patterns, and classify gait disorders. For example, Begg et al. successfully applied supervised learning techniques to automatically recognize young versus old gait types based on data collected from a motion capture system with 83.3% accuracy. Similarly, LeMoyne et al. used features extracted from motion data measured by an inertial measurement unit (IMU) on the ankle joint to train a neural network to distinguish between older adults and people with Friedreich’s ataxia. Given the successful use of ML-based techniques for activity and gait applications to date, we applied ML techniques in this study to learn an accurate mapping from trunk sway collected by an IMU to a PT’s assessment ratings of balance performance, and assessed the feasibility of an ML-based approach for automatically and accurately evaluating balance exercise performance. In this pilot study, we used an SVM-based approach to automatically assess balance performance based on trunk sway collected from an IMU sensor. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to develop and validate the use of ML techniques to automatically provide PT-like assessments of balance performance. On held-out data, compared to self-assessment ratings, the ratings generated by the SVM classifier were significantly closer to those of the PT. In the five-class rating classification, the SVM outperformed the participants’ self-assessments with respect to precision, recall, and F1-score at all rating levels with the exception of precision in rating level 1 and recall in rating level 2. Increased precision indicates a higher confidence when exercises are predicted at a particular rating level. Increased recall indicates that the model correctly captures a larger portion of the exercises at this rating level. Compared to self-assessments, the recall rate increased from 0.42 to 0.78 and the precision rate increased from 0.71 to 0.86 when using the SVM for rating level 5. This indicates that the SVM model was significantly better than participants at identifying difficult/unsafe exercises that could cause losses of balance. The recall for exercises rated as level 2 and precision for exercises rated as level 1 decreased slightly compared to the self-assessments. However, upon further inspection, we noted that the algorithm re-classified many exercises rated level 2 as level 1. Further investigation is needed to understand the difference between rating levels 1 and 2. Such a distinction is particularly important since when designing a balance training program, the inclusion of easy to perform exercises (i.e., exercises with low ratings (1,2)) should be minimized because they produce fewer benefits. Exercises rated level 3 or level 4 (i.e., exercises most often recommended by PTs for repetitive training) showed both increased precision and recall. Balance performance is often described by kinematic metrics including the RMS of trunk sway, PZ, EA of trunk sway, trial length, trajectory path length of trunk sway, and RMS of trunk sway angular velocity. Here, we investigated the relative importance of different kinematic metrics and statistical descriptors to better understand how they relate to PT assessments. In this study, RMS of trunk sway, PZ, trial length, and path length were ranked as the top four indicators. Notably, RMS of trunk sway in the roll direction was more important than overall RMS and RMS in pitch direction, which suggests that RMS in the roll direction is more closely associated with an exercise’s level of difficulty. This observation reaffirms the reality that difficult exercises (e.g., tandem stance with yaw head movements, which reduces the base of support in the medial-lateral direction) challenge balance in the roll direction. Melzer et al. also found that fallers had significantly higher trunk sway in the roll direction compared to non-fallers for balance exercises performed with eyes open and eyes closed. Among the statistical descriptors, the trend across six trials was ranked highest in terms of feature importance. This suggests that the PT involved in this study strongly considered changes in performance over all six trials when evaluating participants. Average performance (i.e., mean) and worst performance (i.e., max) among the six trials were the least important statistical descriptors, whereas the best performance (i.e., min) among the six trials was the second most important statistical descriptor. The implication of these results is that one poorly performed trial may not affect the overall rating assigned to the performance, while a well-performed trial may drive the overall rating. This pilot study has several limitations. First, only one PT provided the ratings that were used as ground truth, and we did not assess intra-rater reliability. If the intra-rater reliability was low (e.g., two sets that appear to be the same are rated differently), it could negatively impact classification accuracy. However, if the intra-rater reliability was low it would affect both the accuracy of the SVM and the participant’s self-assessments. Second, we only investigated standing exercises, but standard balance training programs include weight shifting, modified center of gravity, and gait exercises. Different feature extraction methods are likely needed to automate ratings for these additional types of exercises. Third, PT ratings were unevenly distributed across classes. To mitigate this effect, we considered F1 scores when evaluating classification performance. Still, the uneven distribution across classes could suggest why performance was lower in less prevalent classes. Last, the text accompanying the numerical values in the two rating scales used by the participants and PT to assess balance performance differed slightly to reflect the language that each group would use to describe balance performance; the lack of a single scale used by both the participants and the PT could have affected the outcomes. Automated balance performance assessments have the potential to augment existing in-home balance training programs. In particular, automated assessments could guide participants in the selection of appropriate exercises, potentially allowing for more flexibility compared to a fixed program, since multiple exercise options exist at any given difficulty level. In addition to providing greater flexibility, automated assessment could impact program effectiveness, since training performed at an appropriate level has been shown to lead to greater improvements in balance. Furthermore, automated assessments have the potential to provide balance trainees with immediate feedback following the completion of an exercise, which may increase compliance and motivation, a general problem with traditional in-home training programs. Finally, the accurate identification of difficult/unsafe exercises is likely to reduce the performance of unsafe exercises in the absence of a PT, thereby decreasing the risk of falls in the home. Aside from increasing the number of losses of balance and fall risk, exercises that exceed an individual’s capabilities typically do not have positive effects on training outcomes. Future work could include studies involving various levels of PT supervision. For example, a non-supervised study performed in the clinic or in the home could leverage a device similar to the smartphone balance trainer to assess balance performance by collecting and analyzing trunk-based sway data and step-out data (either manually entered by trainees or potentially automatically detected). These assessments could then either be accessed by PTs to form the basis of subsequent balance training regimes or an automated recommender system could be implemented. Using ML techniques, we successfully learned a mapping from trunk sway data from a single IMU to a PT’s assessment of balance performance. Compared to self-assessment ratings, the automatically generated ratings more closely agreed with the PT. On a three-level scale, the model achieved an accuracy of 82%. The results of this study could be used to provide in-home balance assessments during unsupervised or semi-supervised balance training programs. Such automated assessments could lead to a reduction in PT consultation time, an increase in compliance, and an overall improvement in the effectiveness of in-home balance training programs.
