Credit card fraud (CCF) is a type of identity theft in which someone other than the owner makes an unlawful transaction using a credit card or account details. A credit card that has been stolen, lost, or counterfeited might result in fraud. Card-not-present fraud, or the use of your credit card number in e-commerce transactions, has also become increasingly common as a result of the increase in online shopping. Increased fraud, such as CCF, has resulted from the expansion of e-banking and several online payment environments, resulting in annual losses of billions of dollars. In this era of digital payments, CCF detection has become one of the most important goals. As a business owner, it cannot be disputed that the future is heading towards a cashless culture. As a result, typical payment methods will no longer be used in the future, and therefore they will not be helpful for expanding a business. Customers will not always visit the business with cash in their pockets. They are now placing a premium on debit and credit card payments. As a result, companies will need to update their environment to ensure that they can take all types of payments. In the next years, this situation is expected to become much more severe. In 2020, there were 393,207 cases of CCF out of approximately 1.4 million total reports of identity theft. CCF is now the second most prevalent sort of identity theft recorded as of this year, only following government documents and benefits fraud. In 2020, there were 365,597 incidences of fraud perpetrated using new credit card accounts. The number of identity theft complaints has climbed by 113% from 2019 to 2020, with credit card identity theft reports increasing by 44.6%. Payment card theft cost the global economy $24.26 billion last year. With 38.6% of reported card fraud losses in 2018, the United States is the most vulnerable country to credit theft. As a result, financial institutions should prioritize equipping themselves with an automated fraud detection system. The goal of supervised CCF detection is to create a machine learning (ML) model based on existing transactional credit card payment data. The model should distinguish between fraudulent and non-fraudulent transactions, and use this information to decide whether an incoming transaction is fraudulent or not. The issue involves a variety of fundamental problems, including the system's quick reaction time, cost sensitivity, and feature pre-processing. ML is a field of artificial intelligence that uses a computer to make predictions based on prior data trends. ML models have been used in many studies to solve numerous challenges. Deep learning (DL) algorithms applied in applications in computer network intrusion detection, banking, insurance, mobile cellular networks, health care fraud detection, medical and malware detection, detection for video surveillance, location tracking, Android malware detection, home automation, and heart disease prediction. We explore the practical application of ML, particularly DL algorithms, to identify credit card thefts in the banking industry in this paper. For data categorization challenges, the support vector machine (SVM) is a supervised ML technique. It is employed in a variety of domains, including image recognition, credit rating, and public safety. SVM can tackle linear and nonlinear binary classification problems, and it finds a hyperplane that separates the input data in the support vector, which is superior to other classifiers. Neural networks were the first method used to identify credit card theft in the past. As a result, DL, a branch of ML, is currently focused on DL approaches. In recent years, deep learning approaches have received significant attention due to substantial and promising outcomes in various applications, such as computer vision, natural language processing, and voice. However, only a few studies have examined the application of deep neural networks in identifying CCF. It uses a number of deep learning algorithms for detecting CCF. However, in this study, we choose the CNN model and its layers to determine if the original fraud is the normal transaction of qualified datasets. Some transactions are common in datasets that have been labeled fraudulent and demonstrate questionable transaction behavior. As a result, we focus on supervised and unsupervised learning in this research paper. The class imbalance is the problem in ML where the total number of a class of data (positive) is far less than the total number of another class of data (negative). The classification challenge of the unbalanced dataset has been the subject of several studies. An extensive collection of studies can provide several answers. Therefore, to the best of our knowledge, the problem of class imbalance has not yet been solved. We propose to alter the DL algorithm of the CNN model by adding additional layers for feature extraction and the classification of credit card transactions as fraudulent or otherwise. The top attributes from the prepared dataset are ranked using feature selection techniques. After that, CCF is classified using several supervised machine-driven and deep learning models. In this study, the main aim is to detect fraudulent transactions using credit cards with the help of ML algorithms and deep learning algorithms. This study makes the following contributions: Feature selection algorithms are used to rank the top features from the CCF transaction dataset, which help in class label predictions. The deep learning model is proposed by adding a number of additional layers that are then used to extract the features and classification from the credit card fraud detection dataset. To analyze the performance of the CNN model, different architectures of CNN layers are applied. To perform a comparative analysis between ML with DL algorithms and proposed CNN with baseline model, the results prove that the proposed approach outperforms existing approaches. To assess the accuracy of the classifiers, performance evaluation measures, accuracy, precision, and recall are used. Experiments are performed on the latest credit cards dataset. The rest of the paper is structured as follows: The second section examines the related works. The proposed model and its methodology are described in depth in Section 3. The dataset and evaluation measures are described in Section 4. It also shows the outcomes of our tests on a real dataset, as well as the analysis. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper. CCF is an increasing threat to financial institutions. Fraudsters tend to constantly come up with new fraud methods. A robust classifier can handle the changing nature of fraud. Accurately predicting fraud cases and reducing false-positive cases is the foremost priority of a fraud detection system. The performance of ML methods varies for each individual business case. The type of input data is a dominant factor that drives different ML methods. For detecting CCF, the number of features, number of transactions, and correlation between the features are essential factors in determining the model's performance. DL methods, such as CNNs and their layers, are associated with the processing of text and the baseline model. Using these methods for the detection of credit cards yields better performance than traditional algorithms. Comparing all the algorithm performances side to side, the CNN with 20 layers and the baseline model is the top method with an accuracy of 99.72%. Numerous sampling techniques are used to increase the performance of existing examples, but they significantly decrease on the unseen data. The performance on unseen data increased as the class imbalance increased. Future work associated may explore the use of more state-of-the-art deep learning methods to improve the performance of the model proposed in this study.
