Energy demand, expected to rise by 47% over the next 15 years, is increasing dramatically in accordance with population growth and industrialization. The industrial manufacturing sector is by far the biggest electrical energy consumer, with a share of more than 30% of the global total. Many attempts are being made worldwide to decrease energy usage in the manufacturing process, among which strategies associated with machine tools, such as launching EU directives for ecodesign and initiating ISO 14995 for energy measurement, are the most prominent. Energy efficiency is a measure for achieving energy conservation. Energy (efficiency) modeling of machine tools helps evaluate energy efficiency in different machining conditions or when different machining parameters are adopted, providing a useful tool for investigating the energy mechanism. As a precondition for energy-aware design and optimization, energy (efficiency) modeling has received sustained attention in the past couple of decades. The existing modeling methods can fall into two categories: physical methods and experimental statistical methods. Physical modeling is a kind of white-box technique, where energy efficiency models are established based on the principles of energy transferring from electrical systems to mechanical systems. However, due to the nondeterministic and process-dependent nature of mechanical machining, physical models are less practical. Experimental statistical methods are much preferred in this domain, especially when lacking a physical basis. In these methods, experiments are first conducted by varying the machining parameter combinations under various machine-tool-workpiece conditions. Based on the experimental energy data, the mapping relationships are explored through statistical methods such as polynomial regression and ridge regression. It is worth mentioning that although the physical and experimental methods are widely used for machining practice, they are generally developed toward specific machining configurations, where parameter spaces, machine tool specifications, and tool–workpiece combinations are predetermined. Due to the lack of consideration of the configuration parameters (e.g., machine tools, cutting tools, and workpieces) in the energy efficiency models, it is insufficient to predict energy efficiency for these interactive and integrated machining systems. Yet, when any change occurs to the configurations, a new round of modeling should be performed all over again. The sacrifice of computational efficiency becomes more prominent for flexible machining, where frequent alterations in machining configurations can be usually observed. In this context, new challenges arise when developing generalized models of energy efficiency with consideration of complex chip formation, material property requirements, tool wear, machine degradation, and so on. On the other hand, the increase in the dimension of the configuration parameters usually means higher computational complexity of modeling. However, when fitting high-nonlinear and high-dimensional functions, there might be problems of multicollinearity and numerical instability facing classical statistical methods, bringing about a negative influence on prediction ability. Machine-learning (ML) techniques make it possible to turn the huge amount of machinery data into actionable information even facing complicated behaviors. ML tools have been broadly investigated in scientific studies, offering new alternatives for the modeling of machining systems. Examples of the approaches are found in research, such as artificial neural networks (ANNs), support vector regression (SVR), Gaussian process regression (GPR), and regression trees (RTs). However, applications of ML algorithms for energy modeling are yet limited, which can be divided into three groups. The majority of the works studied parameter-dependent ANN models. Exemplification can be found in studies. The second line of research built energy models with a partial consideration of the machining configuration variables. For instance, Quintana et al. developed an ANN predictor to model power consumption in high-speed ball-end milling operations using machining parameters, tool radius, and lubrication as inputs. Al-Hazza et al. incorporated tool rake into the ANN model for predicting energy consumed in high-speed hard-turning. A third line of research sought to apply other approaches, such as GPR and its variation, to improve the accuracy of the ANN models. In recent years, deep learning (DL), as a main batch of ML, has witnessed overwhelming success in audio recognition, computer vision, and natural language processing. DL tools have frequently broken new records of accuracy in many applications. It is then a natural practice to apply DL models for machining systems to enhance prediction performance. Although there are few references related to DL-based energy efficiency modeling, DL techniques have been tested with good performance in other related areas, such as machinery fault diagnosis, tool wear, and machine remaining life prediction. ML models have gained a lot of research attention, and in response, several survey studies focusing on the comparative analysis of the existing ML approaches have been published. The focus of Pimenov et al. was on the performance comparison of a series of ML methods (i.e., random forest, multilayer perceptions, RTs, and radial-based functions) in cutting power prediction. A similar work studying the ANN and SVR methods for the prediction of roughness, cutting force, and tool life can be found in other studies. Those comparative studies are essential to offer insights in terms of the research potential of ML-based modeling for machining systems and current research gaps. Nonetheless, there is a lack of survey studies that look into the ML-based models in predicting machining energy efficiency, particularly in terms of the types of data (e.g., simulated data, monitoring data, and derived data), the types of features (e.g., machining parameters and machining configuration variables), and the sizes of the data (e.g., interval of data collection and the amount of data instances). Filling this research gap is the objective of this article. More specifically, this article studies three traditional ML algorithms (i.e., ANN, SVR, and GPR) and three typical DL algorithms (i.e., convolutional neural network (CNN), stacked autoencoder (SAE), and deep belief network (DBN)), as well as their performance in machining efficiency prediction. To sum up, readers can benefit from the comparative study in the following aspects: We investigate the ML methods from a more multivariate perspective such as feature selection, data size, and collection interval for energy efficiency modeling. With such an investigation, it becomes easier for readers to identify the appropriate methods according to the available data set. We derive general and useful tips for the design of ML models (both traditional ML models and DL models). The neural network structure and algorithm parameters provided in this article help readers to expand them in a specific application. The rest of this article is organized as follows. The study context, including problem description and challenges of configuration-dependent energy efficiency modeling, is described in Section II. The primary works for energy efficiency modeling, such as identifying model inputs, research methodology, and evaluation indexes, are introduced in Section III. Machinery data acquisition, data preprocessing, and dataset design are detailed in Section IV. Modeling processes and results for cases under different scenarios are discussed in Section V, followed by the concluding remarks in Section VI. This article explores the capabilities of three traditional ML algorithms and three DL algorithms for energy efficiency modeling. Our goal is to find suitable algorithms in two different scenarios: the first one is modeling under steady-state conditions, and the second one considers the effects of spindle motor aging and tool wear on energy efficiency in mechanical machining. The scope of a set of models refers not only to prediction accuracy but also to the types of data used, the types of features used, and the sizes of data and computational time. Feature selection and the required data preparation are first reviewed. The performance evaluation is carried out in terms of five reliable and well-known statistical indicators. The sensitivity of ML models to training data size and time is investigated by means of learning curve analysis. As seen from the comparative study, these two kinds of modeling algorithms have their strengths and weaknesses. Traditional ML algorithms are more suitable for small sample situations, while DL performance is better regarding feature learning on images and time series. When spindle motor aging and tool wear are neglected, GPR models perform best in terms of accuracy, stability, and time efficiency. However, underfitting occurs in all the models due to the lack of important feature items, and the accuracy cannot be further improved by raising the training data size. Thus, it is necessary to add spindle motor aging and tool wear indexes into the models. DL provides a new viable option for energy efficiency modeling. The simulation results show that CNN, SAE, and DBN have better prediction performance over GPR, ANN, and SVR, whereas the model selection phase is far more complex, making it easy for them to come to overfitting. We are planning to extend our research in the following aspects. An in-depth comparative analysis on additional data sets covering various processes as well as the exploration of additional performance measurements will lead to a comprehensive model comparison. The effort is also aimed at complementing the physics-based models established by prior researchers to improve energy efficiency prediction. The impact and coupling effects of configuration parameters and machining parameters will be further explored.
