The internet is transforming people's jobs, learning, and lifestyles, and today, allowing the integration of social life and the internet, which increases security threats in various ways. What counts now is learning how to identify network threats and cyberattacks, particularly those previously seen. Cybersecurity is defined as the process of implementing cyber protective measures and policies to protect data, programs, servers, and network infrastructures from unauthorized access or modification. The internet connects the majority of our computer systems and network infrastructure. As a result, cybersecurity emerged as the backbone for practically all types of corporations, governments, and even people to secure data, grow their businesses, and maintain privacy. People send and receive data across network infrastructure, such as a router, that can be hacked and manipulated by outsiders. The increased use of the internet has increased the amount and complexity of data, resulting in the emergence of big data. The constant rise of the internet and extensive data necessitated the creation of a reliable intrusion detection system. Network security is a subset of cybersecurity that safeguards systems connected to a network against malicious activity. The goal is to provide networked computers to ensure data security, integrity, and accessibility. Current cybersecurity research focuses on creating an effective intrusion detection system that can identify both known and new attacks and threats with high accuracy and a low false alarm rate. As shown in Figure 1, the terms Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), and Deep Learning (DL) are frequently used interchangeably to describe the same principles in software development. These names all indicate the same thing: a machine programmed to learn and find the best solution to a problem. DL is a subfield of machine learning, whereas machine learning is a subfield of AI. As a result, ML and DL are employed to create an efficient and effective intrusion detection system. This paper provides an overview of machine learning and deep learning applications and approaches in intrusion detection systems by concentrating on network security technologies, methodologies, and implementation. Alan Turing stated that general use computers could learn and qualify originality, which has paved the way to whether computers should look at data to develop rules rather than allow humans to do it. Machine learning algorithms are algorithms that can learn and adapt based on data. Machine learning algorithms are designed to generate output based on what is learned from data and examples. For example, such algorithms will allow a computer to choose and perform a particular task on novel traffic detection without explicit information. Automatic analyses of attacks and security events, such as spam mail, user identification, social media analytics, and attack detection may be performed efficiently using machine learning. As indicated in Figure 2, there are three main techniques to machine learning: supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement learning. Supervised learning is based on labeled data, unsupervised learning is based on unlabelled data, and semi-supervised learning is based on both. Deep learning (DL) is a new subfield of machine learning, which is itself a subfield of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Traditional machine learning techniques are limited to processing natural raw data that rely on adequate feature extraction, and in order to classify or find patterns by a classifier, the raw data must be transformed into the appropriate format, which is where deep learning comes in. Deep learning is a machine learning approach that can learn from unstructured or unlabeled data and representation based on human brain knowledge. Deep learning is motivated by neural networks (NN), which can mimic the human brain and perform analytical learning by analyzing data like text, images, and audio. In contrast to deep learning models, which feature multiple connected layers, shallow learning models are built up of a few hidden layers. By stacking layers on top of layers, DL will be able to express increasing complexity functions more effectively. DL is used to learn representations with many abstraction levels. Deep neural networks are capable of finding and learning representations from raw data and performing feature learning and classification. Machine learning methodologies are also utilized in deep learning. However, other ways are employed in deep learning, such as Transfer Learning, as shown in Figure 3. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the intrusion detection system concept. Section 3 summarizes the most frequently utilized datasets for the intrusion detection system. Section 4 discusses recent advances in machine learning and deep learning-based intrusion detection systems, while Section 5 concludes this paper. One of the essential subjects in the cybersecurity area was intrusion detection systems. Many researchers are developing a system that will secure data against malicious conduct. However, research into other applications of learning algorithms, such as establishing a new dataset or merging algorithms, is currently ongoing. As a result, we explain the concept of an intrusion detection system, types of attacks, and how to determine whether or not we have an effective system in this work. Selecting a good dataset to train and test an intrusion detection system is a crucial parameter, and it was clear that datasets have an impact on research in this sector, as some deem it out of date or contains redundant information. As a result, the most frequent datasets used to detect threats over the last decade are compared in the research. The final step in this project was to look into what other people did to save their data. Recent research has revealed that there are numerous data protection implementations. They employed machine learning for several purposes at first, and many studies were conducted to determine which algorithm would provide higher accuracy or which datasets would produce a lower false alarm rate. Finally, they arrived at deep learning after extensive investigation and testing. Many studies and experiments have shown that deep learning is superior to machine learning because it can handle more complicated problems with greater accuracy and lower false alarm rates. Previous work has been used in a variety of applications. They employed various datasets, architectures, learning methodologies, and learning algorithms to secure data from attacks and dangers each time.
