Web service providers are increasingly storing their users' personal information. This could be information a user generates in interacting with the site, like browsing patterns and user transactions, to facilitate a better user experience. It could also be pictures, videos, and other data provided by a user. The providers often share a significant portion of this consumer data with third parties for additional analysis to improve their businesses. Hence, even though this shared data provides many beneficial services to users, its confidentiality and use remain a concern for many consumers. Due to the increase in sensitive information used by web services, regulatory authorities worldwide are formulating data protection regulations to protect their users' data. Examples are the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, Australian Privacy Principles, Canada's Personal Information Protection and Electronic Data Act, and the California Online Privacy Protection Act. Web service providers must adhere to these regulations if they are using data from users in these regions. This increase in complex data protection regulations has resulted in tremendous legal compliance challenges for web service providers. Whenever businesses update their privacy policies, they need to check compliance against these regulations and laws. As an example of such regulations, we focus on GDPR. GDPR has become a key regulation as its penalties can be significant in a data breach when a service provider uses EU users' data. Web service providers include GDPR rules in their policies to make their systems robust, operable in Europe, and acceptable to consumers. GDPR covers many rules for organizations utilizing European users' data. It has become one of the most impactful regulations, even outside Europe, as it has significant penalties. Organizations must pay large fines of up to ten million euros or 2% of their entire global revenue in the case of a data breach. Furthermore, according to GDPR, data subjects have the right to question web service providers and consumers. As organizations change or update their privacy policies, they need to ensure that these policies continue to comply with GDPR. GDPR has complex rules in articles associated with various roles involved in using web services. This regulation document is massive, consisting of 99 articles where each article has a lengthy description. Currently, the process of ensuring compliance with a regulation is labor-intensive and time-consuming. Human intervention is required to extract the key summary rules from the text manually. Web service privacy policies often incorporate summaries from the regulation documents like rules for service providers and consumers. However, these privacy policy text documents are short when compared to the colossal regulatory documents. End users often must deal with the complexity of understanding the regulation rules and relating them to a service provider's stated privacy policies. Web service providers exploit a user's data in a variety of ways. To perform any analysis on customer datasets and relate it to an individual user, Personally Identifiable Information (PII) is needed. As mentioned, the privacy of PII and other data managed by service providers is often of significant concern to consumers, and regulatory bodies worldwide are announcing their jurisdiction-specific data protection laws. The increase in comprehensive regulations causes significant regulation compliance challenges to protect user's data. For example, GDPR identifies the rules that apply to organizations using any EU individual data like name, address, email address, medical records, social media posts. Service policy documents, currently accessible only in textual format, require substantial human intervention in terms of time and effort to check for compliance and prevent huge penalties in case of data breaches. Our automated framework can help the web service providers to recognize missing areas in their privacy policy by using the classified GDPR class, and the overall compliance rate helps to make updates to their privacy policy to be more compliant to GDPR. It identifies the GDPR class by using BiLSTM multi-class classification and further summarizes the extracted context using a Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) based text summarizer to obtain the similarity score between the privacy policy and GDPR document. Besides saving organizational human resources for checking compliance, it also helps by generating a summary of the privacy policy, enabling potentially inconsistent policies in an organization to be more easily recognized and corrected. While a more detailed evaluation is currently underway, the preliminary assessment of our novel approach has been promising. We have carefully reviewed the relevant literature and have not found reliable work or baselines for comparing the privacy policies of web service providers with GDPR requirements. This is not surprising since GDPR is still relatively new, having been implemented only in 2018. Therefore, our research on automatically comparing other policies to GDPR is novel. The structure of the remaining paper is as follows. Section II gives background and related work on short text classification using machine and deep learning methods. In Section III, we describe the technical approach of our framework, covering data collection, text classification, creating knowledge graphs from information extracted from the documents, text summarization, and an evaluation of our results. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section IV and identify ongoing and future work. Our technical research relies on several AI and machine learning technologies, including text classification, word embeddings, and text summarization. Web service providers need to ensure that their policies comply with regulations like the EU's GDPR. These policies are short pieces of text when compared with regulation documents, and both sets of documents are available only in textual format. It currently requires significant human intervention to ensure that the policy document, e.g., a privacy policy, covers the regulations in GDPR. We have developed a novel framework using Deep Learning and Semantic Web approaches to capture the knowledge embedded in regulatory and web service policies. This knowledge is then stored in knowledge graphs corresponding to the authority and referencing documents which can be queried and reasoned over to determine if a policy is compliant with the authoritative or regulatory document. In this paper, we include the results of our study by comparing web service privacy policies with GDPR rules. We began by identifying critical entities in the GDPR document and then used combinations of entities as GDPR classes. Next, we applied machine learning and deep learning to determine whether the GDPR class exists in a privacy policy document. After identifying the class using a multi-class text classification approach, we summarized the extracted text using BERT text summarization. Finally, we compared the summaries of authority and referencing documents to obtain a context similarity score. The extracted summary and the context similarity scores were stored in the referencing document knowledge graph. We validated our approach against five privacy policies adhering to GDPR and five that were not adhering to GDPR. Since there is no existing reliable work or baselines for checking privacy policy compliance with GDPR, our framework will significantly benefit service providers by automatically identifying the uncovered GDPR areas in their privacy policy documents. This will help prevent organizations from running afoul of the regulations and having to pay penalties for not adhering to them. In this paper, we did stick to identifying missing GDPR areas and checking for compliance rate. As the regulation document is approximately 100 pages, whereas the privacy policies usually tend to be less than ten pages, so it would be hard to perform rule-by-rule analysis, so we used BERT summarizer to summarize the documents and check for compliance rate. However, we will consider extracting the rules as part of our future work and see their impact. Also, as part of our future work, we plan to create an automated tool that takes the results of our framework and populates the referencing knowledge graph. We also plan to work with a legal advisor to evaluate and score our results manually.
