The main goal of every company or any retail store is to get maximum benefit. This is possible only when they sell more quantity of products, and as a result they gain maximum income. The manager of the particular company or retail store plays an important role to increase the deals of their products by estimating the future sales and arranging the materials, workers and staffs. One of the most important information a company or any store can have the information created by the users, customers, clients. Based on the information given by the users a companies or stores is going find the patterns using machine learning algorithm and this can give raise to a more efficiency forecasting of sales. Managers should try to build good network and make new habits that will improve their performance and to meet customer satisfaction. Few of the techniques are provided by machine learning to give solutions to any kind of complex issues which are hard to address. The Sales forecasting is the basic for production and to get profit. In the areas like where the products are used quickly, sales estimation becomes difficult. Some of the customers who buys items like rice, vegetables, milk etc. have short time of usability and this kind of products can be selected by the customers easily. When it comes to some products like electronic products, clothes which have very short lifecycle, products which can be outdated so quickly etc. Customers will face difficulty while selecting the product. Mainly sales forecasting is used when a retail industry or company want to make a profit without wastage raw material and to make the product cost affordable to everyone. Nowadays many stores, or any kind of industries dont have any kind of clarity on future sales. This is mainly because of lack of knowledge on the products, information to estimate sales. There are some techniques to predict sales in grocery stores depends on some models. The use of the models for forecasting sales results in kind of difficulties like wastage of products, loss in business etc. This type of models generally produced a result in a poor performance. However, machine learning has become the important subject that has produced a significant result in forecasting with maximum efficiency. To accurately estimate future sales, a machine learning is going to follow supervised learning. In this learning a model is built based which can learn based on the previous data history and going to determine the prediction which is required for the client. To accurately estimate future sales, a machine learning model is going trained using the past information by the clients, users from which it is going to predict the future sales. An efficient forecasting model can be used for any company or industry income and to make profits and also provides some additional information about the nature and type of the clients who make better profit in business. Nowadays the online shopping has become famous. To buy any kind of items including vegetables and electronic items the people are showing interest to buy them in online shopping sites. Dealers are frequently requesting their product clients and users to share their reviews on the products they purchased. By this millions of reviews created by the clients and users across the Internet. This had made the internet a major source for getting ideas on the products. As the reviews given by the customer can be negative or positive depends on their experience. However, there are millions of reviews positive and negative feedbacks on a single product which makes the new purchase confuse whether he should take that product or not. Analyzing the feedbacks is mandatory for all companies and retail industries. For all online firms inspecting this feedback plays an important role for their business profits. In recent years the machine learning models are playing an important role in review suggestions for customers based on their interest. The major steps taken for sales forecasting are basically collecting all the required information related to the products pre-processing the information separating the reviews as positive or negative. In addition to this all we need to analyze the customers opinions on products. The conclusion we are getting from this study is the advantages of applying Machine Learning to sales forecasting. And to find out if they are any advantages over the previous or traditional techniques. In section 2, we are going to study about the various literature reviews followed by in section 3, we will observe from some problem definitions. And In section 4, we will discuss about various algorithms and techniques used in sales forecasting and some important data-preprocessing steps required to build machine learning model. In section 5, we are going to discuss about the performances of the model using some prediction algorithms. In the end the result is summarized in conclusion section by analyzing the future scope and efficiency, accuracy of the model.",
