Phishing impersonated the overlook of email and appears to be as the legitimate source. This tricks users to visit phished sites through links given in phishing email. The phishers will trick users to fill in their personal information by sending alert messages asking to validate their account. This is done so that user will think that it is a mandatory action needed from their end. Anti-Phishing Working Group has defined phishing as a crime of stealing users credential data from financial accounts and identity information. In first quarter of 2018, 263538 number of phish were reported in APWG 1Q report. Referring to the fourth quarter of 2017, this is forty-six percent of from 180577. In addition, 233040 phish were detected in second quarter of 2018 compared to the first quarter which was 263538. This was reported in APWG 2Q. This numbers were higher compared to fourth and third quarter of 2017 which were only 180577 and 190942. With an increase of twenty-one percent of phishing attacks. There were rises in the SAAS/webmail targeted market. The payment industry continues as the most appealing phishing target. Today many security researchers are depending on machine learning techniques to overcome weakness of existing approaches. This technique only requires previous data to analyze or predict future data hence it comprises a wide range or algorithms. Machine learning establishes analytical models by using complex intervention during supervised leaning. This technique appears to be appropriate for the detection of phishing pages, as this tricky can be transformed into a classification mission. Machine learning techniques were used to progress measures to perceive phishing actions founded on the classification of existing web sites, and these replicas can be incorporated hooked on the browser. Machine Learning models instantaneously detect the valid site and then advancing the production to the user at the other end. The key accomplishment is the structures of the website in the input data set and the accessibility of satisfactory sites for the structure of reliable logical replicas for the expansion of Machine Learning models for computerized anti-phishing identification. The main aim of this survey is to study the comprehensive analysis and relevant literature review that supports the research questions and propose an approach in analyzing and classifying phishing and legitimate websites. Phishing is one of cyber-world's major problems and leads to both industry and individual financial losses. High accuracy phishing attack detection has always been a challenge. More than 80 percent of users believe the green lock icon on the browser URL bar means the webpage is legitimate and secure, according to a report by Phish Labs. The confusing 'Safe' label given to verifiable HTTPS websites by modern browsers, even if it is a fake one, just aggravates the situations. To compare, a screenshot of the legitimate PayPal login page, visually almost the same as the fake one. This was the limitation of phishing website which gave machine learning to penetrate through it making it possible to identify if it is possible to identify whether the website is fake or legitimate. In a nutshell, phishing detection tools are crucial in ensuring safe online experience to users, to ensure that online users do not become targets to online fraud, to distribute confidential information to an assailant and to effectively use phishing as an attacking device. Unfortunately, a significant number of existing phishing detector devices has error classification caused by a delay in updating the blacklist due to human intervention in classification. Such weaknesses are often caused by the flaws in the precision of detection. These critical problems led many researchers to work on different approaches to improve phishing attacks detection accuracy and to minimize false alarm rates. The inconsistent nature and constantly changing URL patterns of attacks requires the reference model to be updated in due time. The goal of this survey paper is to study and analyze the previous works in order to identify the suitable approach in classifying phishing and legitimate websites. Based on the literature review, Machine Learning can be concluded and has been proven to be the most effective approach to achieve the aim of the paper.",
