Text summarization is the process of generating a coherent and accurate summary of the original document by extracting essential information and reducing the length of the source document. The summary helps in easy and fast information retrieval by retaining the gist of the document as mentioned by Dalwadi et al. According to Arun Krishna Chitturi et al., the text summarization aims at consolidating the source document into an optimized form, preserving the overall idea and information intact. In layman's language, conversion of lengthy texts into short and meaningful sentences is the main idea behind text summarization. The need for text summarization is continuously increasing as today's world is getting flooded with a growing amount of articles and links to choose from with the expansion of the internet. Human beings tend to read the whole document to develop an understanding of it and generate a summary by keeping the main points in mind. It is getting extremely difficult to obtain the required information from this pool of words and sentences in a short period. Going through all the documents, articles, and different forms of information to manually summarize is extremely time-consuming and exhausting for humans. Summarization helps in saving valuable time and conveys the main essence from which the reader can decide if they want to dig deeper. The first automatic text summarizer came into existence in the 1950s and since then summarization has been enhancing. Text summarization can be used for various purposes like email summary, reviews of movies, news headlines, outline of student notes, summarizing information for businessmen and government officials, summarizing medical data for doctors, summarizing legal documents, novel or book summaries helping consumers decide to read them or not, and code summarizers as acknowledged by Deepali K. Gaikwad et al. Removing the important information because of the large addition of it on the internet, as self-explanatory briefing will be of more value. Following this there is an immeasurable amount of energy which concerns the age of the already programmed content summary structure which helps to establish the abstracts that follow consequently from the content, web, and the organization messages that are related with their own satellite's substances. This review contains and shows how the swarm intelligence advancements are carried out to accomplish the task of content summarization. Text summarization approaches can be broadly divided into extractive and abstractive text summarization. As the usage of the internet is continuously increasing so is the volume of information present. Sorting out the right information from this huge pile of information present is not easy, but if we have a gist of the document we are getting in, it will become a lot easier. Just like the abstract of this review paper gives its insight, text summarization does the same and generates a comprehensive summary. Thus, there is an immense need for text summarization to save time and effort. The better it gets the more we will be able to apply it to more complex language like that in a scientific paper or even an entire book. In this paper, fundamental concepts and approaches to automatic text summarization have been discussed. The paper starts with a brief introduction to automatic text summarization and the work done in the past and present. This paper emphasizes the various methods of abstractive text summarization like a recurrent neural network, long short-term memory network, encoder-decoder model, and pointer-generator mechanism
