In recent years, robotics has become one of the most popular topics for engineers. Robots have a significant place because they are designed for different purposes in many fields like medicine. Robots are designed with various shapes to study extraterrestrial planets in space. Another research area is humanoid robotic arms and hands. Such robots will have vital roles in human life in the future. Recently, humanoid robots combined with artificial intelligence are a subject of study. Many topologies have been developed to design and use these robots. These robots are widely used in the aerospace industry in factories. One of the primary purposes of robotic arms is to grasp an object. For this reason, robotic arms bring many advantages. One of them is to reduce the human factor. They increase productivity by minimizing human errors. In addition, they increase the production speed and efficiency by working without rest. These robotic arms have no specific shape or specific rules for development. The designs of robots differ according to their purpose. These robots can take the form of a five-fingered hand, just like a human. On the other hand, these robots can have two, three, or more fingers. How these robots hold objects and grasp quality is an important factor. Researchers conduct many tests to observe this situation and experiment to develop the best architecture. One of the ways to improve the grasp quality of robotic hands is through machine learning (ML) techniques. ML is a technique that helps estimate future results and modeling based on experiences learned from pre-learned data. ML techniques are mostly used for classification problems. They predict which class the data belongs to as a result of probabilistic calculation. Logistic regression, decision tree, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), gradient boosting machine (GBM), and light GBM are some of the algorithms that are used for classification. Additionally, to these algorithms, the neural network is one of the well-known techniques for classification. It was developed in the early 1940s regarding the biological neuron. It's simply the neuron's way of connecting other neurons and transmitting information to the nucleus. Synapses are points of connection of the dendrites to other neurons. A neural network works as a biological neuron. They receive information from the other neuron and perform the necessary mathematical operations. After that, they send them to the next neuron. Neural networks took some time to come into use because computers were not fast enough to solve these problems. With the development of microprocessor technology in the 21st century, neural network algorithms became popular and nonlinear problems began to be solved with artificial intelligence. It is widely used in data science and mechatronics applications. Multilayer perceptron (MLP) is one of the neural network algorithms. MLP occurs in one or more hidden layers. A single neuron is shown in Fig. 1. Here represent the weights. The inputs from the dataset are multiplied by weights and then all added together to get. This value is sent to the activation function. The activation function is the main factor for calculation. Activation functions provide a probabilistic value between 0 and 1 as a result. These are the possible results of which class it may belong to in classification problems. The sigmoid and relu functions are most used to solve problems. The outputs of the first layer are the inputs of the neurons of the second layer. The more neuron layers exist in the hidden layer, the deeper a structure is formed and represents a non-linear state. These are called deep learning networks (DNN). As a result, the output of each neuron layer forms the input information of the next layer. The third and final part is the output layer. This layer receives values from the hidden layer and sends the output of the neural network algorithm after its calculations. Significant parameters in learning are weights and a bias value. When the algorithm starts the first iteration, weights and a bias are predetermined for all layers and neurons. In the first layer, weights and values are calculated and sent to other neurons. This process continues until the output value calculation. At the end of the first iteration, the expected output is compared with the system output. This process is called forward propagation. The total error is calculated based on the output value compared to the expected value. These errors are returned to the network again. The weights of the neurons are updated by the algorithm to reduce the output error. The process follows for each neuron and its weight. This process then repeats itself until the error is minimal. At the end of the process, the network performs a learning process. It is called backpropagation. In this study, the benefits of using edge ML for communication networks are explained. For this purpose, the robotic hand and its grasping methods are described for the first time with the edge ML structure as an IoT device. In addition, it is aimed to compare two different ML methods rather than to obtain the best grasp ratio. The method was the federated AVG algorithm that trains the data for each edge device and creates a global model through the model exchange. Results were compared with centralized ML. Obtained results are values open to improvement. Considering the advantages of Edge ML in the field of communication networks, these studies will be beneficial for any IoT device using ML in the future. When different types of neural network structures are combined with edge ML, better results can be obtained.
