The encounter of large amounts of biological sequence data generated over the last decades, combined with algorithmic and hardware improvements, has enabled the application of machine learning techniques to real-world problems in bioinformatics. The availability of sequence data has steadily increased, thanks to the constant advancements in sequencing hardware. Concurrently, machine learning approaches have evolved, incorporating fundamentally new techniques such as deep learning, efficient recursive methods for sequence processing, generative adversarial networks, and reinforcement learning. These advances have been facilitated by massive parallel hardware developments, such as specialized graphic processing units (GPUs). Consequently, machine learning has gained popularity in many research areas, particularly in bioinformatics, as an alternative to classical statistical methods. However, these approaches typically require vast databases and efficient implementations of the respective training algorithms that support the hardware architectures. Notably, interpretable machine learning necessitates sophisticated data preprocessing for efficient training and meaningful inference. These algorithms perform inherent data comparisons for learning. Yet, the concepts of sequence data preprocessing and comparison are often not clearly distinguished in bioinformatics. From a machine learning perspective, delineating these concepts could be beneficial, enabling consistent and meaningful combinations to support the machine learning algorithm in use. This paper aims to analyze and review existing concepts and methods of sequence data preprocessing and comparison, resulting in the development of a systematic framework. The focus is on alignment-free methods, which will be explained in detail. The framework is designed from a processor-oriented perspective, emphasizing that suitable comparative measures for sequences depend not only on the biological application but also on the algorithms used. Their respective requirements may determine the necessary concepts in sequence data processing, contrasting with problem-oriented categorizations based on domain knowledge. We propose a systematic categorization that highlights two key concepts essential for successful comparison analysis: data transformation, including adequate mathematical sequence coding and feature generation, and the subsequent (dis-)similarity evaluation of the transformed data using problem-specific but mathematically consistent proximity measures. This distinction clarifies the range of available methods and assists in identifying suitable methods in machine learning and data analysis for sequence comparison. The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 motivates the focus on alignment-free comparison methods and the general need for their systematization from a machine learning perspective. Section 3 presents the elaborated conceptual framework, with a verbal description of the systematization modules to avoid excessive mathematical detail. Section 4 demonstrates the validity and applicability of our systematization by examining common approaches from the literature, with an in-text description omitted. Readers are referred to the glossary in Section 6 for detailed explanations of specific methods. Section 5 summarizes the key findings. The application of machine learning methods in molecular biology has been gaining interest, offering alternatives to classical statistical approaches. Machine learning approaches are particularly suited to areas with large amounts of data but limited theoretical frameworks, which is common in bioinformatics. These tools have explicit and implicit data requirements that critically influence results and their interpretation. Users of these methods often face challenges in selecting data transformation approaches that align with machine learning methods, potentially leading to information loss or the need for domain knowledge. To address this, we presented a framework that decomposes data preparation into sequence data coding, feature generation, and subsequent comparison. This modularization allows for the comparison of different strategies based on their mathematical and informational properties, ensuring a machine learning-consistent data representation. We categorized existing approaches into this scheme to validate its effectiveness and provide inspiration for combining modules from various approaches to enhance capability and interpretability. This decomposition helps biology experts recognize data representation issues and select suitable machine learning approaches, while machine learners can benefit from incorporating biological domain knowledge into their model design for better interpretability. Future analyses should also consider the time complexity and compatibility of these methods with big data applications.
