Pavement is one of the most significant civic setups for the movement of automobiles and people in contemporary transportation. For civil engineers, pavement service superiority and useful life are critical since they directly impact the users' regular service. Monitoring the condition of pavements and performing appropriate repairs are therefore critical for public transportation safety. The Pavement Quality Index (PCI) is a measure that assesses a pavement's or road's overall surface quality. It is measured on a numerical scale of 0 to 100. The United States Army Corps of Engineers established this statistical metric, which needs manual/visual examination and inspection of the needed routes. PCI surveying techniques for roads and airport pavements were standardized by ASTM International, a worldwide standards organization that creates and publishes voluntary consensus standards for a variety of services, goods, and systems. As a result of the quantitative assessment awarded to roads, it employs verbal criteria ranging from "failed" to "excellent." The goal of highway preservation and restoration is to enhance the state of a pavement system to decrease expenses, boost useful service life, reduce carbon footprint, and increase the safety of road users. The main pattern for measuring the physical and useful status of civic infrastructures is a manual visual examination. Defective inspections and condition assessments, however, continue to cause accidents. Pavement faults also cost Indian drivers crores of rupees in repairs each year, according to the Ministry of State for Road Transport & Highways Government of India. To summarize, road surface inspection to discover faults is critical for ensuring traffic safety. Different features of the application of machine learning techniques to pavement predictive analysis can be differentiated: pavement quality is indicated by the International Roughness Index (IRI), the emphasis of neural networks in determining the IRI, and the creation of databases that last long-term. This study does not concentrate just on the construction of the most extensively used approaches but instead provides a quick overview of the many procedures that have been created, including ANNs for prediction and CNNs for image processing and recognition. The various indications or magnitudes to be identified are then discussed. One of the most essential civic infrastructures is pavement. It is vital to examine the condition of the pavement and perform regular maintenance to guarantee its functioning and safety. Currently, civil engineers gather pavement dynamic response data using a range of invasive sensing technologies and assess surface conditions using image processing techniques and machine learning algorithms based on pavement pictures. Pavement surface distress and structural state may be successfully discovered, categorized, and evaluated using machine learning approaches. Most studies employed SVM and ANN as classifiers for pavement flaws in the early stages since the accuracy met the technical criteria at the time. Deep learning algorithms like CNN have improved outcomes for pavement distress diagnosis and performance evaluation as computer technology has developed because of its local connectivity and weight sharing. The diverse functions of machine learning approaches may help civil engineers solve various pavement monitoring difficulties, such as recognizing the types of pavement fractures and marking the area of pavement damage. However, future research should take into account the following points: (1) To generate a significantly bigger dataset, more field/laboratory testing on pavement performance and conditions is required.
