The proliferation of web-based usage has also resulted in an escalation in unauthorized network access. In this scenario, it is imperative to periodically monitor log records of the network. Web servers are prone to various cyber-attacks aimed at extracting information about the internal architecture and various other details, including user access patterns and internal administrator account details. Periodic monitoring of log records is a tedious and complex process that could be automated. Machine learning techniques have gained popularity recently due to their ability to make better decisions without human intervention. Thus, analyzing logs at a large scale can be done more efficiently using machine learning techniques. Machine learning classification and clustering algorithms can be employed to label a particular entry in the log as normal or abnormal. The most challenging task is obtaining a genuine log dataset for analysis. Log datasets often consist of a huge number of text messages in an unstructured format. Even in medium-sized firms, periodical log datasets involve millions of entries. Additionally, the log data format varies from service to service and organization to organization. The log datasets are highly diverse and contain a vast range of information from login events to critical system failures. Therefore, it is essential to generate a static template for analysis. In our study, we utilize company-generated network log datasets that contain several million entries, with only 5% resembling abnormal behavior. This creates a class imbalance problem, where one particular type of cluster is much smaller compared to the other class. We propose using k-means (k=2), resulting in two clusters: normal and abnormal, along with a self-organizing feature map (SOFM) of artificial neural networks consisting of neurons in the input and output layers. Our focus is on textual information in log data, specifically searching for bigram words (e.g., “ACCESS DENIED,” “401 ERROR,” “INVALID PASSCODE,” etc.). We applied a supervised machine learning approach and validated the system against a large volume of another network log dataset. The experimental results showed that the accuracy of predicting abnormal behavior was high and acceptable. This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a state-of-the-art review of the work carried out in the area of network security using various approaches. Section 3 details the architecture of the proposed system. Section 4 presents the experimental results. The paper concludes with Section 5. In this work, the analysis of log data from a network has been carried out to identify anomalies in access patterns. The model has been trained using k-means and SOFM clustering. The proposed model has been tested across sample datasets and achieved 97.2% accuracy with a false rate of 2.7%. This work, which focuses solely on text data of log records and uses supervised learning, can be further extended to analyze both text and non-text real-time data.
