The prediction of asset price has always been the core content in the field of asset pricing, which mainly estimates the trading price of financial products, especially the stock price in the capital market. Since the 1970s, many scholars have begun to look for predictor variables that can explain the cross-sectional differences or time series changes of asset returns, on this basis, many classical asset pricing models have been proposed. Many predictor variables are usually calculated by stock price indices or financial data. In the overseas financial community, these predictor variables have a proper name: return predictors. The current consensus is that systemic risk and investor behavior’s deviation jointly drive the difference in the cross section of asset return. Therefore, return predictors include predictors representing systemic risks and emotional factors representing investors’ behavioral deviations. Traditional asset pricing models explain cross-sectional differences of stock returns through several multi-factor models with a few predictors. In fact, these multi-factor models only select a few factors from a large number of optional company characteristics. The isolated study, only focusing on a small number of factors, shows that scholars have added a strong sparsity constraint to the models. Although the sparsity constraint can ensure the good performance of traditional statistical methods, the sparsity constraint is ad hoc and varies with each individual. With the development of technology, people can construct hundreds of predictor variables from public information. However, a large number of potential predictor variables will lead to the inapplicability of traditional statistical methods (OLS). In addition, based on the sparsity assumption, traditional asset pricing models assume that investors have enough time to learn the functional relationship between predictor variables and predicted variables in a stable environment, while the model reflects the equilibrium state after investors learning the functional relationship. However, in the high-dimensional environment, the assumption that investors have learned the functional relationship becomes unconvincing. Therefore, there is a mismatch between the prediction difficulty faced in theoretical models and that faced in the real world by investors, which leads to unsatisfactory empirical performance of existing asset pricing theories. Machine learning toolbox offers a new opportunity for people to analyze asset prices, without imposing extreme and ad hoc sparse assumptions. In empirical studies, machine learning tools allow econometricians to consider the interactions among a large number of predictor variables. In theoretical research, machine learning tools can provide inspiration for economic decision-making modeling in complex and uncertain high-dimensional environments, without making unrealistic simplifications of the environment. At present, the application of machine learning in asset pricing is still in the early stage of exploration; the research focuses mainly on return prediction or closely related issues. With the introduction of machine learning tools, innovation means using new data or algorithms. Using machine learning tools to predict fundamental financial indicators or mining the nonlinear relationship between factors and returns has become a research hotspot. Some innovations in the latest literature mainly focus on searching for new alternative data that can become revenue sources (such as public opinion data, patent data, news data, etc.), discovering new anomalies, and improving existing predictive variables. However, there is still a lot of work to be done to integrate machine learning methods with asset pricing theory and empirical methods closely. There are two promising directions for machine learning methods in the future: one is to empirically estimate the asset demand system based on investors’ detailed portfolio holding data, and the other is to analyze expectation data of investors. Both directions generally belong to the field of asset demand analysis.
