In this modern world, science and technology have created a far more incredible world than they used to be. In this situation, the fluctuating prices of mobile phones are now attracting the public’s attention as the price is a crucial effect of consumer choices on buying smartphones. Brand loyalty is an important determinant, which represents the market share of different brands of mobile phone markets in China recently, from which we can deduce that the market share is directly proportional to consumer choices: the first few ranks are Huawei with a market share of 28.1%, 13.3% of Oppo, and Apple at 11.3%. Despite that, factors including Bluetooth, screen, memory, battery power, and camera will affect the price of mobile phones. It should be straightforward that many researchers discovered the relationship between mobile price and customer behaviors; however, the research gap is the fact that people have little knowledge of the way various functions match multiple price levels. As can be seen from the above, the significance of this research can not only predict the price of mobile phones based on different properties but also enable consumers to have a certain knowledge of the price standard of mobile phones, which enhances people to make rational consumption in the future. The study aims to predict the mobile price levels by machine learning techniques when the features of smartphones are given, which helps people take aware of the functions in addition to the prices of mobile phones. The dataset is obtained from the website of Kaggle, after preprocessing the data and selecting the most 4 relevant features (in this case, they are RAM, battery_power, px_width, and px_height), 4 machine learning algorithms (SVM, DT, KNN, and NB) were employed to fit the training dataset of mobile price and make a prediction on the price level. The study demonstrates the way to classify and predict the mobile price level using 4 different machine learning algorithms. When the mobile price dataset is acquired, the first step is to read the information about the data and employ the data processing method. We can conclude from the tables and diagrams mentioned before to see the presence of missing values and different features of the data (in this situation, different features indicate the various functions of mobile phones). Furthermore, the second step is feature selection--an important procedure before applying the machine learning algorithms. On the one hand, feature selection could help to find several significant features out of massive features to save the programming time, reduce the probability of dimensionality, and raise the performance of the further prediction (the results have been shown above). On the other hand, the correlations between the functions of mobile phones and mobile price levels have been discovered through the process of feature selection. As mentioned in the study, the price should be in the dominant place when consumers are deciding to buy a phone and, in our study, we can have a quick version about the factors influencing the price level of mobile phones. The following step is to classify the price level with and without feature selection by using 4 machine learning algorithms (Support Vector Machine, Decision Tree, K Nearest Neighbors, and Naive Bayes) and make the prediction on that, which leads to better performance after the process of feature selection. Moreover, in terms of the evaluation of 4 machine learning algorithms, it could be easily seen that SVM performs the best with and without feature selection while the NB has the worst achievement. These results should be taken into account when choosing the most suitable classifiers, for example, SVM is capable of dealing with high dimensional data and KNN is extremely time-consuming. However, the limitations are existing during this study, such as the data size is not large enough to make the most accurate prediction, especially for DT and NB classifiers. The classifiers like Random Forest and AdaBoost could also be introduced to not only find out the performance but also make comparisons with different algorithms. In addition, the process of feature selection is informal, which is due to the fact that the process of feature selection is mainly concentrated on the relationship between features and target labels. There are alternative methods for feature selection including wrapper-based, filter-based, and intrinsic-based feature selections. The primary goal of the study is to predict the mobile price based on the features such as availability of Bluetooth as well as battery power, and we suddenly conclude the result of this research which indicates the main objective was achieved. In conclusion, the 4 machine learning techniques were constructive in predicting the mobile price level using the features of RAM, battery_power, px_width, and px_height (random access memory, battery power, pixel resolution height, and width) for data collected from the website of Kaggle published by Abhishek Shaema. We used Support Vector Machine, Decision Tree, K Nearest Neighbors, and Naïve Bayes classifiers to predict the price level and the performance was recorded and appraised by accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. Based on the outcomes shown above, the SVM classifier creates the best performance with and without feature selection; meanwhile, the Naïve Bayes classifier provides the lowest accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. In terms of the remaining two classifiers, their differences could be clear as the outcome produced by the K-Nearest Neighbor classifier is around 95% and that produced by the Decision Tree classifier is around 90% during the study with and without feature selection. Furthermore, there is an overall improvement when the process of feature selection was introduced, which builds a solid foundation to help people to do the cost minimization when choosing mobile phones at different price levels. Further research could be needed to determine the predictions after using other types of feature selection by different machine learning algorithms. On the one hand, from the perspective of business, the prediction would be beneficial to understand the way to set the price according to different functions of the smartphones; on the other hand, the result could be useful to customers to select mobile phones at distinct prices. As a consequence, people are now with a better understanding of the connection between functions and price level of mobile phones.
