Wuhan Municipal Health Commission report the coronavirus on 31st Dec 2019, which spread through SARS-CoV-2 virus. This pandemic situation has tremendous effects worldwide. This virus is spread through person-to-person, especially when a normal person is close to an infected person. To deal with the situation, government announce a complete lockdown at a certain limit. At that time, social media had a great role in sharing the story of people with everyone, but no one was sure whether the information is conscious or unconscious. To resolve these issues, COVID-19 is one of the most important topics for all researchers for their work. Some researchers use NLP, which report the symptoms, precaution, and health condition of COVID-19. Whereas others once focused on image processing where they report patient X-ray analysis to confirm the infected person. And we focus on presenting the fact-checking report of social media posts, and we use machine learning and transfer learning classification algorithms. These models are appropriate for many natural processing tasks and are used by other authors to enhance their work. Next, we explain all three models that we used to get some accurate results. In this paper, we used three pre-trained sentiment analysis models with Python to detect fake news on the tweet dataset. And the basic explanation of these models is as follows: BERT, DistilBERT, RoBERTa. This paper resolves the problem to detect fake news about COVID-19 fake news using three different pre-trained transfer learning models. The creativity of our work is to take advantage of the transformer model to pre-train the model on the tweet dataset and achieved the best performance of that. In this paper, we discussed three different types of pre-trained transfer learning models to prevent misleading information regarding the COVID-19 pandemic. Every day new crises occur with this pandemic, and we get new sentences per second, such as rate of death, infected people, new vaccines, and some other variants, etc. these make it difficult for any model to predict tweets that are misleading or real. As a result, the RoBERTa transfer learning model gives a better result for the new COVID-19 prediction. Furthermore, in the future, we can work with the linguistic features of tweet statements and apply the same or different transfer learning models to predict better results for COVID-19 or else.
