Social media plays an increasingly important role these days, as it attracts an increasing number of people with different interests. Therefore, social media may serve as a good place to conduct social experiments. Emotions are quick and short human reactions. Misunderstanding them in advertising campaigns, marketing, and other aspects may lead to large financial losses. The uniqueness of social media is that the users themselves produce the content. Therefore, the analysis of social network content allows one to assess the sentiments of real users. Every year, with the increase of social media audience, the volume of content generated also increases. However, the technological advances and the growth of machine learning and big data technologies allow such information to be automatically analyzed. Nowadays, there are two main directions of methods for determining sentiment: linguistic methods and machine learning methods. However, machine learning methods are currently more accurate. Unsupervised machine learning methods determine the similarity of content on social media and group it into different sets. Supervised machine learning algorithms and models, such as neural networks and statistical models, use labeled data for their training. Most of the works of sentiment analyzing of posts on social media handle content dedicated to a particular topic, such as a review of products and services. At the same time, these works use considerably large models. The main aim of this paper is to design a sentiment analysis algorithm that is independent of the topics of social media posts and uses little memory. In this paper, we considered methods of designing an algorithm for annotating Russian-language text data of social media. In particular, we focused on the problem of sentiment analysis of sentences. It has been shown that unsupervised machine learning algorithms can be used to separate sentences from each other, but this method gives rather poor accuracy. Statistical supervised machine learning methods demonstrated higher accuracy than the clustering algorithm, but worse than the BERT transformer and gradient boosting models. The algorithm for determining sentiment based on BERT and gradient boosting has the following advantages: the independence of the prediction of sentiment from the context, since the models were trained on a corpus with different topics and have a final F1 measure score of at least 0.76; low memory consumption because rather lightweight models are used. In conclusion, we can say that this constructed algorithm can be used to analyze any textual Russian-language posts in social media
