There are a variety of chronic diseases in the globe today, which are found in both developed and developing countries. Diabetes mellitus, or diabetes as it is now known, is one of these chronic diseases that is responsible for premature death in humans. Increased appetite, thirst, weight loss, weariness, impaired eyesight, and frequent urination are all symptoms. This occurs when the patient's pancreas is unable to create enough insulin, resulting in the body's inability to regulate sugar and glucose levels in the blood. Another cause of diabetes is insulin resistance in cells found in the liver, muscle, and fat. Diabetes has been shown to be on the increase in Asian nations such as India. Various health sectors are working together to anticipate the emergence of chronic illnesses in the future, possibly saving lives. Diabetes can damage numerous human organs, including the eye, heart, nerves, and kidneys. Currently, doctors take a blood sample from their patients and evaluate the sugar concentration in their blood to diagnose diabetes. This procedure used by doctors is time-consuming, and it includes features such as blood pressure, insulin levels, the patient's age, and body mass index (BMI). If a patient's ancestor has diabetes, there is a possibility that the patient will develop diabetes in the future. Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes are the two forms of diabetes. There are currently no intrusive techniques to predict whether a patient has type 1 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is unrelated to insulin levels, and it has been found to be more widespread in Pima Indians than in any other population on the planet. If type 2 diabetes is identified early enough, it can be cured. Data mining, machine learning (ML), and statistical approaches are all part of predictive analysis. Through predictive analysis of healthcare data, important judgements and projections may be formed. Predictive analytics can make use of machine learning and regression technologies. To improve patient care, optimize resources, and improve clinical results, predictive analysis aims at diagnosing the illness as correctly as possible. In medical applications, machine learning has proven to be a viable support tool. It can detect trends in medical records that people are unable to detect. It can aid in analyzing and making future predictions. These predictions can be used to help people avoid contracting certain diseases. Diabetes mellitus is one such ailment. This disease has no cure, although it can be avoided if necessary precautions are taken. To determine if a patient is diabetic or not, Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Bayesian Network (BN), and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) models, Decision Tree (DT), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and Logistic Regression (LR) models can be utilized well. This is why a large amount of data is collected by various organizations. The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney is one such organization that has collected and provided the Pima India Diabetes Dataset. This dataset used in this research has 768 instances, each instance having 8 attributes with which the patients were medically tested upon. In clinical practice, machine learning predictive models can emphasize better guidelines for making decisions about individual patient treatment. Early detection and appropriate therapies are the only ways to lower the death rates caused by chronic diseases. Type 2 diabetes is one of the most common endocrine illnesses in the world today. Utilizing the machine learning prediction models presented in this study, we were able to detect higher accuracy by using a hybrid model that reached an accuracy of 90.62 percent. The next stage is to apply the numerous strategies outlined in this research study to a different or larger dataset than the one used to increase the accuracy of the model produced for prediction. In addition, we may train the model using attributes such as a person's daily eating habits and exercise routines, as these factors might influence whether or not a person is diabetic. The accuracy of the prediction model may be greatly enhanced by using Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and unsupervised learning techniques on a bigger dataset. Similar prediction models can be developed for a variety of diseases, such as heart disease, cancer, brain tumors, asthma, and so on.
