Emotions are dynamic cognitive and physiological conditions that develop in response to input, such as experiences, thoughts, or interactions with people. It includes sensory substances, cognitive processes, behavioral influences, physiological responses, and communication. Therefore, emotion recognition is crucial in applications such as marketing, safe driving, human-computer interaction, healthcare, mental health monitoring, and safety. Emotional research for healthcare includes a large number of neurological disorders such as sleep disorders, schizophrenia, sleep quality assessment, and Parkinson’s disease. Studies have shown that emotions can have a great impact on human health, and negative emotions can affect mental activities, cause mental illness, and even lead to lesions in tissues and organs through complex physiological changes. Emotion is a comprehensive state of people’s feelings, thoughts, and behaviors, playing a very important role in human life by affecting both physiological and psychological states. Positive emotions help improve health and productivity, while negative emotions can lead to health problems. Generally, the data used for emotion recognition can be divided into two categories. The first category uses behavioral data such as facial expressions and voice tone, which is simple to collect but can be easily masked or camouflaged. The second category uses physiological data such as electroencephalography (EEG), skin temperature (SKT), electro-oculogram (EOG), plethysmograph (PPG), respiration (RSP), electromyography (EMG), electrocardiogram (ECG), and Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) to identify emotions. This data collection cannot be disguised and can provide real and objective results. Among these signals, ECG and GSR signals can be collected at the wrist, while other physiological signals need to be detected by special measuring instruments, and the analysis of these signals can identify internal emotions. Moreover, sensors can be placed on the human body in a non-invasive and comfortable way to maintain good contact with the body, making the study of emotional characteristics of physiological signals more practical. Therefore, studying emotion recognition based on physiological signals is significant. In this context, it is proposed to use wristbands to collect physiological signals to identify emotions, allowing people to understand their emotional health in real-time. According to experimental results, the recognition rate of skin electrical signals under the SVM model is higher than that of heart rate signals, although the recognition accuracy of both signals is not high compared with neutral emotions. These results demonstrate that it is feasible to use video to induce emotions, providing a new perspective for those conducting experiments related to emotion recognition.
