A method for summarizing a text is called text summarization. It is crucial for data mining's use of natural language processing. Using text summarizing, we can extract important information from large text files. Transformers, KL-summarizer, Luhn, LEX and Word Rank, GPT-1 and GPT-2, and Bert Model, BART, T5, and PEGASUS are examples of text summarization models. Text summarizing methods can be divided mostly into two categories: Extractive Text Summarization and Abstractive Text Summarization. The technique of extracting key words, lines, or phrases from a paragraph and combining them to produce a summary of the text is known as extractive text summarization. Example: Harry and Joe took a plane to Harrisburg for vacations. Joe won a lottery in the city. Output: Harry and Joe went to Harrisburg. Joe won a lottery. Abstractive Text Summarization – While extractive summarization approaches have been frequently employed in the past, they have many drawbacks that make them less successful in some settings. As a result, more advanced and effective summary approaches, such as abstractive summarization methods, are required. One of the key reasons for the need for abstractive summarization approaches is that they can provide more human-like summaries. Extractive approaches merely choose and combine sentences from the original text, which may result in disconnected or difficult-to-read summaries. In contrast, abstractive methods employ natural language generation techniques to generate more informative and accessible summaries. All of the transformer-based models produced a significant amount of accuracy, as indicated by the Rouge Scores. Despite being highly clear, the model was able to perform significantly well on practically all three datasets in terms of the Rouge - N Score. This model was able to extract and summarize the essential elements in the paragraphs, and we were able to visualize the key traits or phrases that it was able to focus on more. Three different datasets were used: datasets from Xsum, MultiNews, and CNN/DailyMail. We were able to implement the Rouge measure between human text summarization and other model summarization. PEGASUS is the best model for the CNN/DailyMail Dataset and Xsum Dataset, whereas T5 is the best model for the MultiNews Dataset.
