In recent times, industries working with large amounts of data have recognized the value of machine learning (ML) technology. Thus, it is widely used in financial services to prevent fraud, in health care to assess a patient’s health in real time, in oil and gas to find new energy sources, in government services to minimize identity theft, in the retail industry to personalize the shopping experience, in transportation to make routes more efficient, and in many other applications. However, machine learning has not gained much attention in computer-aided antenna design. With the advent of clever design exploration methods such as space-filling Design of Experiments (DOE) approaches, machine learning can be used to speed up the antenna design optimization process tremendously. Additionally, machine learning can also accelerate related simulations such as tolerance studies using stochastic methods. This paper presents how to use DOE and machine learning for fast and intelligent antenna design optimization with an example. A trained mathematical model is generated using the multi-disciplinary design exploration and optimization software Altair HyperStudy and numerical electromagnetic field simulations are done with Altair Feko. Machine learning approaches presented in this paper can be applied to any type of antenna design with any number of design variables. The complete workflow of the machine learning approach for antenna design optimization is detailed in the following steps: generate training and test data with an appropriate DOE study and numerical simulation; build a machine learning model based on the generated training data; validate the machine learning model using the generated test data; if the validation is not successful, generate additional training data or use a more appropriate machine learning approach. A slotted patch antenna designed for GPS application is chosen to demonstrate the above workflow. The design of the square patch and its initial reflection coefficient are illustrated, showing that while the initial design has a resonance around the GPS operating frequency of 1575 MHz, there is significant potential for improvement. The patch antenna is fully parametric with respect to the patch size, slot length, slot width, slot-to-edge length, and feed position. To understand the benefits of optimization using machine learning, this approach is compared with traditional optimization using numerical field simulations. For a fair comparison between the two approaches, the Global Response Search Method (GRSM) optimization algorithm is used in both cases. The traditional optimization ran for 250 iterations over a total of 810 seconds. The first step in the machine learning approach is generating the test data, and the space-filling MELS method is used for this design exploration. This DOE study also provides a Pareto chart illustrating the influence of each design variable on the output response. The test data from the DOE study is then used by the Altair proprietary regression algorithm Fit Automatically Selected by Training (FAST) to generate a trained machine learning model. Optimization is then performed on the trained model rather than using the physical antenna design. A comparison of the optimum reflection coefficient obtained using traditional optimization versus machine learning shows that the overall time required for the machine learning approach is 168 seconds (as compared to 810 seconds), of which 162 seconds is spent on the DOE study. This demonstrates that the machine learning approach is orders of magnitude faster than traditional optimization.
