Short-term forecasting, also known as now-casting, is the prediction of time-series data over a short period of time; typically, a few hours. Now-casting can be deployed in various fields such as wind forecasting, electricity price forecasting, electricity load (demand) forecasting, rainfall prediction, solar irradiance prediction, and solar output power prediction. Short-term forecasting has been realized using different techniques. These include traditional statistical techniques such as autoregressive moving average (ARMA), and autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA). Recently, various artificial intelligence techniques have been used for now-casting. These include machine learning algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANN) together with ANN variants such as echo state networks, and support vector machines (SVM). Machine learning is a field of artificial intelligence that enables machines to learn from data without being explicitly programmed. Topological data analysis (TDA) is the use of computational geometric and algebraic topological concepts for the analysis of data; mainly for dimensionality reduction and visualization. In this manuscript, we report a short-term output power prediction algorithm that uses machine learning and topological data analysis. Power generation data from the power utility is used to develop the scheme reported in this manuscript. In order to improve the performance of various machine learning algorithms, TDA is used as a pipeline to such algorithms. Machine learning techniques used are variants of linear regression, k-nearest neighbor, Decision tree regression, Random Forest and extreme gradient boost. Furthermore, the coefficient of determination is used as a performance metric. This metric provides the relationship between the model’s predicted values and the actual values. The key contribution of the work reported in this manuscript is the combination of TDA and machine learning for deployment in output power now-casting. As demonstrated for the first time in this manuscript, the use of TDA as a pipeline to machine learning algorithms greatly improves the performance of short-term forecasting in some machine learning algorithms. The remainder of this manuscript is structured as follows. The next section provides the background information on machine learning, topological data analysis, and coefficient of determination. This is followed by a detailed description of the now-casting scheme reported in this manuscript. Section IV provides and discusses the results obtained. The last section concludes this manuscript. In this manuscript, we have reported the improvement of short-term output power generation forecasting using topological data analysis and different machine learning algorithms. We have demonstrated that TDA can be used as a pipeline to machine learning, as a way of improving the performance of machine learning-based prediction. Machine learning techniques used include variants of linear regression, Random Forest, k-nearest neighbor, Decision regression, and extreme gradient boosting. The results obtained demonstrate the significance of using TDA for time series forecasting. Future work will focus on the use of TDA and other machine learning algorithms such as deep learning algorithms for forecasting the output power generation time series data.
