The internet is a major platform for people both the youth and elderly, which connects millions worldwide. This allows people of all ages to discuss just anything, ranging from general topics such as asking about the best burger place in town or the best budget-friendly mobile phone under 20,000 taka, or more academically focused topics such as computer software technologies (learning a new language, need tutorials!). As the internet is a vast ocean of knowledge and contains social media sites like Facebook and Twitter, it also means that when learning something new, it is ideal for people to seek information and knowledge regarding those topics on these sites. People can join or make various groups on different topics, such as a python (programming language) group, or a cooking group, and members there can make posts that are informational queries. These posts at times are replied to by more experienced members providing knowledge. Detecting posts on these social media sites that are classified as informational queries in a low-resource language such as Bengali is already a limited research focus within Natural Language Processing. Thus, classifying posts written in Bengali as informational queries from platforms such as Facebook and Twitter is already a difficult challenge for researchers of Natural Language Processing. Classifying posts as informational queries by judging the emotion and questions expressed in the post is a subset of sentiment analysis, which is a Natural Language Processing technique that helps to categorize data into two categories: positive and negative. Research regarding low-resource languages is always a valid contribution to the language in question, as there are not many resources attributed to these languages. Even though Bengali has been spoken worldwide by almost 300 million people, we could not come across any available research Bengali text corpus for informational query detection. Automatic detection of Bengali posts that are informational queries by the process of traditional machine learning and modern transfer learning models should prove to be very helpful in the near future, such as tracking current trends of what people of all age groups are trying to gather information on, or what is the possible hot topic of discussion at the moment. This contributes to important statistics that predict the direction in which particular age groups are headed in. But no research articles are based on the classification of informational queries in Bengali. Thus, we wish to propose a research paper that, at the moment, performs binary classification on Bengali posts under informational queries or not, using various machine learning models and transfer learning, and analyzing which of these gives us the most accurate results. Contributions made by this research paper: Developing a dataset in full Bengali language, as there are no existing datasets in the Bengali language for this domain. Our research paper will make it easier for people who use Bengali as their primary language to find and access relevant information and resources on the internet, improving their ability to learn and grow. A practical application of our research would be Facebook promoting informational query-related posts so that people can respond to these posts in an effective time. Examining the performances between traditional machine-learning classifiers and transfer learning methods on our generated dataset. BNLP research is booming. Bengali is a low-resource language, hence study on it is valuable. In this research, we propose many Bengali NLP techniques, mostly by categorizing postings as informative or non-informational questions. These approaches perform well. We couldn’t compare our outcomes to preceding models since BNLP and Bengali informative query after classification had minimal prior work. Thus, we compared transfer learning to typical machine learning models. Since there was no pre-made dataset, this paper’s dataset was painstakingly scraped from Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Manually annotating and cross-checking the dataset ensures accuracy. Future data aggregation will enhance our models. Our research continues. We have ambitious plans for the future, including multi-classification to determine if an informational query is one of many categories, such as healthcare and medicine, traveling, food, etc., which can be used in multiple fields, such as powering new FAQ search engines that can identify the query and fetch relevant answers from similar posts.
