The cost and complexity of managing storage systems, especially large self-managed storage infrastructure, make managing automation tasks a challenge these days. Finding the optimal or near-optimal solution requires predicting how well each device will provide each workload so that the load can be balanced and can be particularly well matched to the corresponding device. Automated storage delivery tools, such as Ergastulum, rely on efficient and accurate device models to make such decisions. This article provides a “black box” through machine learning methods to overcome this obstacle. “Black box” means that the model (and model generation system) does not store information about internal components or algorithms on the device. By giving the device some “training time,” the model generation system learns the behavior of the device, which is similar to a function of taking the workload as input. This article uses machine learning-related algorithms to establish a prediction model and compares the differences in the effectiveness of several machine learning algorithms. On this basis, it proposes the “lastdelay” attribute, which could play an important role in I/O performance prediction on HDDs and is verified on the algorithm for attribute selection. It is considered that the distance attribute is not applicable when performing I/O performance prediction on SSDs. Different tracks should use different metrics, which is proved by the experiment and requires specific analysis on a case-by-case basis. In this paper, “lastdelay” is added on the base of traditional attributes and performs a better prediction effect for I/O performance on disk, and the SSD is not fixed. If the distance is to be removed from traditional metrics on SSDs, a general conclusion is not reached, and the need to analyze specific issues and the need for selecting metrics is figured out. At the same time, different algorithms are compared. In terms of predicted RMSE, RF > GBDT, the Friedman test showed no significant difference. In terms of efficiency, random gradient descent > RF > CART > GBDT. Compared to the CART algorithm, C4.5 has similar classification accuracy, but C4.5 is faster. In terms of speed, C4.5 > CART > NB. There is no significant difference between ID3 and NB algorithms through cross-validation tests. In terms of RMSE, RF, GBDT, CART > multiple linear regression. For I/O performance prediction, using non-linear regression is better than linear regression.
