The satellite geographical data are immensely useful for the prediction and analysis of numerous applications e.g. weather forecast, cropping and yield, disaster prediction , climate changes, urbanisation and so on. One such fundamental application is LULC. In this field, one major task is automatically characterizing the land basing on the physical land type and related usage. Generally, the land cover signifies how the type of land is being developed recently e.g. forest, water, concrete, on the other hand land use documents how people are using the land and Land use shows how people use the landscape that is, whether for development, conservation, or mixed uses. LULC classification is an investigation where we can easily differentiate land cover variables and can perform various actions accordingly. It is mostly desired for future prediction of LULC type for sustainable habitation and development. With the advent of artificial intelligence such as machine learning, it has been possible to classify a given data into possible categories by using specific algorithms. It is pertinent from many observations that the performance and efficiency of ML models depends upon the trainable labelled data and the quality of the classes we are using. Hence, EuroSAT dataset is selected; EuroSAT is an image dataset spread over ten unique classes consisting of 64x64 sized 2700 hyper spectral images covering 13- spectral bands. The EUROSAT dataset is composed of images retrieved from the Sentinel-2 satellite. Hyper spectral images are analysed based on spectroscopy. Spectral resolution arises in hyper- spectral images only. In this paper, we demonstrate different machine learning model’s performance with respect to land usage and land covering classification and hence based on performance and efficiency, the most apposite model is identified. For the simulation of the classification algorithms, we have used publicly available EuroSAT dataset. In this paper, an attempt has been made to automatically trace the land use pattern from remote sensing images as it is quite hard to do it manually by surveying the ground data. In doing so, several machine learning models are implemented; next an ensemble classifier encompassing KNN, DT, RF, SVM and GB classifiers is built and the results produced by each algorithms are reported. On the basis of these results, it is concluded that SVM produces best classification results and the hybrid ensemble yields better than individual algorithms. In future, a higher accuracy in classification can be attained by using hybrid machine learning algorithms and optimizing the input parameters.
