The objective analysis of gait using wearable sensor systems is gaining importance in the treatment of patients with motor impairments. Various studies have identified gait parameters captured by wearable inertial measurement units (IMUs) as digital measures for gait performance in different diseases like Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and post-stroke hemiparesis. From a technical perspective, an important aspect in the signal processing pipeline for IMU-based gait analysis is the segmentation of the recorded data into meaningful portions. One basic unit of gait measurements is a stride, which describes the period from the initial foot contact of one foot until the next initial contact of the same foot in a gait cycle. Stride-level information is essential for defining walking bouts, the measurement of gait variability, or the computation of gait asymmetry, where differences between left and right strides are investigated. In their review about the use of wearable motion sensors for gait assessment, it was reported that a majority of studies prefers the use of only one single sensor unit, which is most often attached close to the center of mass of the participant (e.g., on the lower back). For this sensor setup, the detection of initial contacts (ICs) is very well investigated. Still, to convert a sequence of ICs into strides according to the definition given above, ICs of the same foot need to be grouped and hence the laterality of each IC must be determined. However, this information is usually not directly available from IC detection algorithms and, therefore, stride segmentation is not trivial. Breaks, turns, or missed ICs in the detection contradict the assumption of a steady alternating sequence of left and right ICs. Thus, only the explicit determination of the laterality of the ICs allows defining stride borders and additionally enables differentiating between left and right strides, which is crucial for the investigation of gait asymmetry. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one publication describing an approach for the distinction of left and right ICs detected from a lower back-mounted sensor: McCamley et al. used the sign (positive or negative) of the low-pass filtered gyroscope signal of the vertical axis at the sample of the detected IC to determine the foot it was performed with. However, the laterality assignment was not separately evaluated in their article. Furthermore, only young and healthy participants took part in their study, and the transferability to patients with movement disorders and thus potentially higher gait variability needs to be investigated. Considering the high relevance of stride level parameters, the left-right distinction is a crucial part of a lower back sensor-based gait analysis pipeline and needs further investigations, given the lack of suitable well-evaluated algorithms. Therefore, the goal of this study is twofold: First, we propose potential improvements for the algorithm by McCamley et al. and evaluate the algorithm on data from patients with movement disorders. Second, we present a new approach for the left-right distinction based on supervised machine learning (ML) including cross-validation. For the experiments, a dataset including 40 participants with and without movement impairments, that was previously recorded and presented by Trojaniello et al., was analyzed. The results of our study contribute to a better understanding and an increased reliability of stride-based gait analysis in single-sensor settings. In total, 4,377 ICs (HC: 1,185, PD: 1,187, HD: 1,066, HE: 939) were available in the dataset. An excerpt of the feature space is shown for one participant. Overall, the best performance was achieved for the PD sub-data set and the RFC with a mean accuracy of 100.0% in the leave-one-participant-out cross-validation. There was no clear tendency regarding the performance of different input signals between sub-data sets in the McCamley results. Each gyrv, gyrap, and gyrcomb at least once performed best for one of the sub-data sets. For all sub-data sets, except for HE, the ML approaches reached a significantly higher mean accuracy than the McCamley approaches. In general, the ML approaches tended to show a smaller interquartile range (IQR) than the McCamley approaches over the cross-validation. In this study, we investigated ML-based algorithms for the distinction of left and right ICs from inertial sensor data measured at the lower back. The pre-processing and the feature extraction were based on the work of McCamley et al., who proposed an algorithm based on thresholding of one single gyroscope axis (gyrv). We also expanded the approach by McCamley et al. by two other signal configurations (gyrap, gyrcomb) and performed comparisons between the approaches. According to our observations, not only the gyrv signal, but also the gyrap signal and a combination of the aforementioned (gyrcomb) are alternating in a gait sequence with respect to the left and right ICs. Our results indicate that there are different favorable input signals for different sub-data sets, reflecting that different gait impairments exist depending on the respective health condition. This is a valuable extension of the work of McCamley et al., who used only data from young and healthy participants. As the accuracy depends on the clinical population, an a-priori decision per subject for the input signal axis is required. The use of ML models allows the simultaneous application of multiple features as input for the binary classification. Besides the signal values, the values of the first and second derivative at the IC time points were used in our experiments and two different sensor axes were exploited, resulting in a six-dimensional feature space. The pair plots underline that even if gyroscope data was not separable by means of just the sign of the filtered raw signal, it was possible to separate the classes when using multiple features and sensor axes. Further visual inspection of pair plots revealed distinct inter-participant differences regarding the separability of the classes by either the gyrv or the gyrap data on their own. Using a feature vector with different features from the gyrv and the gyrap axes automatically provides a signal combination that is more valuable for the classification than selecting only one of the gyroscope axes a-priori or computing a hand-crafted signal combination like gyrcomb. The performance of the ML approaches can be described as superior compared to the algorithm by McCamley et al. Within each subgroup, the different ML approaches achieved similar accuracy values, indicating that not a specific model, but the separability of the data in higher dimensional space was responsible for the improvements compared to the algorithm by McCamley et al. Furthermore, there was no tendency that the group-specific models performed better than the model trained on all data, which hints at a good generalizability over clinical populations. Although the results indicate that the use of ML models for the distinction of left and right ICs is very promising, a limitation of this study is that the time points of the ICs were not derived from a dedicated IMU algorithm but from an external reference system. Even though the instrumented mat is an accepted gold standard system for gait analysis, it could be possible that the IC time points have an offset compared to the results of a usual IC detection algorithm for IMU signals. However, for this study, the isolation of the task of left-right distinction was desired and the specific origin of the reference ICs can be considered irrelevant for the presented results. Furthermore, we evaluated the algorithms on an in-lab dataset that was heterogeneous regarding the study population but not with respect to the gait movements. It can be expected that the classification will be more challenging for gait movements from real-life scenarios including curvilinear and inclined walking, as well as spurious, unsteady gait bouts. Hence, in future investigations, the experiments should be extended by assigning ICs detected by an actual IMU-based algorithm. Additionally, a validation on real-world data would be desirable to estimate the robustness of the algorithm on signals measured in challenging setups. In this context, an adaptation of the filters during preprocessing and an extension of the feature set should also be considered. To conclude, our study showed that the optimal sensor axis for the distinction of left and right ICs with the algorithm of McCamley et al. was affected by the investigated study population. Even higher accuracy was achieved by applying ML algorithms with six-dimensional input data. Our results will contribute to a reliable stride-based gait analysis using inertial data measured at the lower back and thus support clinical decisions in the context of movement disorders. In this work, a survey of several machine learning techniques for predicting and detecting heart disease has been used, which generally is quite significant. Based on the above work, it is possible to conclude that machine learning algorithms have a large potential for predicting and diagnosing cardiovascular illnesses or any heart-related diseases. With a large number of datasets, the Decision Tree method performs poorly. Random Forest scored extremely well as it addresses the issue of overfitting by combining numerous algorithms (many Decision Trees). The Naive Bayes classifier was highly quick and performed well in terms of computation. SVM improves efficiency in the vast majority of instances.
