Dams are one of the most critical infrastructures for water resources management. The activity of monitoring dams is vital for society because, in addition to promoting social development, it enhances the environmental security and the safety of the population surrounding these work areas. Dam monitoring can be affected by the extensive impacts of dams with high hazard potential, such as extreme external stresses, design and construction defects, material aging, and intense human activity, and has caused significant societal concern in recent years. One example was the collapse of two dams in the northeastern Brazilian state of Bahia after weeks of heavy rains, which prompted authorities to pay more attention to dam monitoring and protection. The risk factors affecting dams are generally uncertain, diverse, and interrelated, increasing dam risk analysis’s complexity. Therefore, measurement and instrumentation systems are needed to identify the most important risk factors and their impacts on dam risk analysis and management. Measurement and instrumentation systems are critical for providing dam safety monitoring information. Numerous methods have been developed for nondestructive dam safety evaluation, such as infrared thermography, acoustic emission, and ultrasonic testing. The use of ultrasound has been reported in many different fields, and it can be used by systems monitoring dam structure and conditions. Ultrasound is defined as acoustic oscillation whose frequency is above the high-frequency limit of audible sound (about 20 kHz). Devices built with ultrasound can collect data containing relevant information about the physical properties of dams. This way, these data can be used to monitor them by applying machine learning (ML) techniques. ML algorithms are usually classified into classes, depending on the goal and available information: the well-known supervised and unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning, a more general domain. Other approaches, such as hybrid or semi-supervised learning, combine supervised and unsupervised learning. In supervised learning, both predictive attributes/variables and targets/outputs are considered for usually predictive tasks; unsupervised learning, on the other hand, is usually used for descriptive tasks where no information about targets/outputs is considered/available. Finally, reinforcement learning is a general framework for sequential decision-making, where an agent learns to respond to an environment in a trial-and-error dynamic to maximize its rewards. In this work, we propose a methodology using ML and ultrasound to predict and monitor risk factors that may occur in a dam. Our study case is an ultrasound-based dam health monitoring using some piezoelectric transducers to monitor risk factors. Thus, our main contributions are: we build a prototype dam to study structure health monitoring, we describe a very straightforward methodology to apply machine learning methods to interpret the acquired dam database, and we describe the construction of a web application based on the R programming language to implement machine learning algorithms on this ongoing project. The first step to be investigated was the data visualization from the different dam regions. After that, MPCA was applied to the dataset. The data were loaded into the PLS-toolbox software as a 7501x146x60 array, representing the 7501 side scan, the 146 target distance, and the 60 images (10 images from each region of the studied dam). For constructing the MPCA model, the number of principal components was chosen to capture at least 80% of the explained variance. Other methods have been proposed, but they generally do not produce very different results. It is possible to visualize several images obtained from the six regions studied. Region A is grouped around a single point, while the other regions show a separation trend along the PC1-PC2 scores. Displaying the results in 3D dimension, it is possible to see the trend separation of regions B to F. While the project is ongoing, new images will be acquired to improve the model, but preliminary results already show that the methodology is capable of identifying different regions of the prototype dam. The final step of the work was to create the clusters. This figure can illustrate the same grouping obtained by the evaluation diagram of the developed MPCA models, which confirms the obtained results. This work presented a study based on a comprehensive approach for getting ultrasonic fingerprints in an experiment that simulates the conditions observed in a health monitoring system of a real dam structure. By combining multiway principal component analysis (MPCA), clustering, and ultrasound techniques, it was possible to understand the similarities and differences of the six different regions of the prototype dam under study. This methodology can be used to build a rational model to monitor the dam’s health and safety and is an effective way to analyze and evaluate the dam’s condition.
