Cardiovascular disease is a hazardous disorder for humans, accounting for approximately 17.9 million deaths every year worldwide, which represents 32% of all global deaths. CVD is expected to account for over 23.6 million deaths annually by 2030. In Europe, there were 1.68 million deaths resulting from cardiovascular disease in 2016, which was equivalent to 37.1% of all deaths. Several risk factors can trigger cardiovascular disease, such as diabetes mellitus, LDL cholesterol, blood pressure, irregular pulse rate, physical activity, unhealthy diet, family history of CVD, and ethnic background. Cardiovascular disease can be predicted using multiple tests. However, the lack of expertise of medical staff can make early diagnosis difficult. It is necessary to evaluate the risk of cardiovascular disease for prevention, both primary and secondary. There are several statistical risk scores that predict the risk of patients with previous CVD events or non-CVD events, including SCORE2, QRISK3, Framingham Risk Score (FRS), Joint British Society risk calculator 3 (JBS3), Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD), American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA), HeartScore, WHO risk score, and CoroPredict. The effectiveness of these statistical models and risk scores has been evaluated in several studies based on different ethnicities. The main outcome of these works was that these scores predict the percentage of patients to be at high or low risk of developing CVD. Machine learning algorithms are an alternative effective approach, which can also be used for the detection of disease outcomes and events when trained on proper medical data. Recently, machine learning models have been used extensively for the prediction of CVD. The proposed machine learning models achieve good predictions of CVD, with accuracy larger than 90%. Specifically, the hyOPTXg model extracted the highest AUC value equal to 0.947, using optimization techniques (min-max scaling, OPTUNA: Hyper-parameter tuning) and an optimized Extreme Gradient Booster. In another study, in which ten ML models were applied, the Extreme Gradient Boost and Gradient Boost presented the highest AUC value (0.812). Also, compared to Framingham and ACC/AHA risk models, the ML models presented equal to or greater outcomes. Additionally, various machine learning approaches, including Naïve Bayes (NB), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Decision Tree (DT), K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN), Radial Basis Function (RBF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Single Conjunctive Rule Learner (SCRL), were used on the Cleveland Heart Disease database. The comparison of all classifiers showed that SVM achieved the highest accuracy and SCRL had the lowest accuracy with 84.15% and 69.96%, respectively. SVM improved to 84.81% with the use of bagging, and the combination of classifiers, MLP and SVM, proved to be the most accurate with 84.15% after stacking. This work aims to predict death caused by CVD after ten years of follow-up using only simple biomarkers routinely collected in the Ludwigshafen Risk and Cardiovascular Health (LURIC) dataset. Six different machine learning algorithms were applied, with Logistic Regression presenting the best performance. The results show that the mean values of accuracy and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve were 72.20% and 72.97%, respectively. Monitoring patients with a history of cardiovascular disease is crucial for preventing new cases and reducing patient mortality. In this study, the 10-year risk of cardiovascular mortality of patients scheduled for angiography has been predicted using machine learning techniques. The six machine learning models were tested with various parameter values to get the highest accuracy before comparison. Logistic Regression outperformed all other models with the highest average accuracy (72.20%) and AUC value (72.97%). The novelty of this paper lies in the parallel use of multiple ML models, including both modern (e.g., XGB) and standard algorithmic models (e.g., LR), aiming to predict 10-year CVD mortality using only easily collected biomarkers in everyday clinical routine. The principal goal was to predict CVD mortality using different machine learning techniques in a small dataset and to choose the best predictive computational model by comparing them. Limitations included population size and the absence of optimization techniques. This paper is based on 10 consecutive runs, resulting in LR mean accuracy and AUC values slightly surpassing those of XGB. Future analysis aims to include 100 runs to further increase accuracy and validity of the results. Finally, a future goal is to establish a risk score and to estimate and compare the established CoroPredict score with its calculated values in the LURIC dataset within the TIMELY study.
