Cybersecurity will protect internet-connected systems from cyber threats. The main aim of implementing Cybersecurity is to protect the computers, servers, networks, mobile phones, and data from the attackers. Cyber-attacks are developed to delete our data, destroy essential data, and disturb the business process; by forcing the organization to pay. The organization must implement cybersecurity tools to protect the organization from cyber-attacks. Cybersecurity tools will provide multiple layers of protection to the computer, networks, and programs. There are many cybersecurity threads available: 1. Phishing: Cyber-attackers will send a fraudulent email that looks from a trusted source to the user. A cyber-attacker aims to steal sensitive information from the user. You can protect yourself from these attacks using Cisco's email security. It is one of the best security mechanisms against phishing, malware, and ransomware. 2. Ransomware: It is malicious software. This one developed to extort money from the individual and large organizations. After you pay the amount, there is no guarantee that your data will be returned. Cisco umbrella will provide a cloud-based security mechanism. 3. Malware: Designed to access and gain unauthorized data. Cisco A.M.P. will provide end to end security mechanism. 4. D-Dos attack, 5. A man within the middle, 6. Escape, and 7. PROBE. When we implement machine learning tools into Cybersecurity, we can improve the detection system's protection measures. Cyber-attack happened in 2007. Almost 200000 computers were affected in more than 150 countries. The national security team discovered the vulnerabilities. Many countries are affected by "Ransomware," including individuals, schools, banks, and telecommunication. Cybercriminals created Cryptojacking techniques to share the malware on many computers. In 2021 average per attack in weekly 1605. This one increased 75% when compared to 2020. African continent experience highest attack in 2021. This paper has discussed how machine learning tools are efficiently used in Cybersecurity. The machine learning tools are powerful and can be used against cyber offence activities. Machine learning provided more layers of security. It will help us identify the threats quickly and respond to their use. Modern technologies tool is implemented with machine learning. We can solve our business challenges with the help of machine learning. We can prevent the cyber threats using realtime cybercrime mapping and penetration testing.
