One of the first and most important implementations of information technology in medicine is the replacement of the traditional paper-based documentation of medical data with digitized files, resulting in the creation of a vast repository of digital information that is constantly growing. The combination of an aging population and nursing staff shortages implies the need for more advanced systems in the healthcare industry. Many key enablers for the optimization of healthcare systems require provisioning of location awareness for patients (e.g., with dementia), nurses, doctors, assets, etc. Therefore, many Indoor Positioning Systems (IPSs) will be indispensable in healthcare systems. Localization, with an expected 4.4 billion market in 2019, is one of the main pillars for indoor services. Most of the newest applications need to know the user's location to customize their services, monitor people, or track Internet-of-Things objects, among others. Moreover, the location can also be used for detecting the user's activities and to provide services based on their location. Concurrently, Machine Learning is a vastly growing domain that enables learning and decision-making through the analysis and processing of an immense amount of data. Several ML algorithms have been implemented for healthcare purposes, improving the standard of living of thousands of people. There has already been a lot of published work about algorithms focusing on the field of diagnosis or the prediction of epidemics. Furthermore, there is strong evidence suggesting that machine learning methods and applications can have a significant impact not only on the quality but also on the cost of health care services. On the other hand, it is important to take into account the fact that the healthcare sector, and especially the part that involves medical data, presents a number of peculiarities. As a result, there is a delay in estimating the effect of ML implementations, compared to other domains. The most crucial aspects that could impede the application of ML algorithms and need to be addressed by interventions similar to MODELHealth are: the disinclination of the Electronic Health Records (EHR) owners to provide access to medical data for secondary purposes, because of medical privacy and confidentiality. Although there have been numerous studies about anonymization techniques in health data and Electronic Health Records (EHR), there are still weaknesses that may arise during their implementation. Thus, data owners cannot be efficiently convinced to take this responsibility. A crucial section of the MODELHealth project is the research, the standardization and the automation of anonymization of EHR data; the difficulty of integrating the required structures for the efficient use of existing algorithms, without increasing the cost and the complexity to an undesirable extent. Health science is a complex and multifactorial field where causality relationships are not always easily discernible, which should be taken into account when applying ML algorithms. Consequently, the same precision cannot be achieved when an algorithm has been trained on a dataset and then is applied to data of patients with different demographic profiles; thus, often, retraining of the algorithms in the new context is warranted. Nevertheless, the infrastructure that the retraining process requires can be of high cost and complexity. MODELHealth focuses on the development of a “plug and play” platform that will provide the required infrastructure, without expecting the association with the technical complexity by those involved; ML algorithms are difficult to be efficiently implemented and reused when medical data are derived from numerous heterogeneous sources. For instance, a diverse number of databases, storage schemes, and units of measurements may be used by each provider. One essential objective of the project is the creation of an Ontological Scheme that transforms health data into a universal form. This will discharge the process of algorithm development from the environment and the data storage format, enabling their reuse in any environment with the same Ontological Scheme. Considering the characteristics described above, an innovative software platform, enabling the development of an environment for big data exploitation is proposed in MODELHealth. The project offers an end-to-end solution including the procedures of: pumping, anonymizing and enriching heterogeneous data from various health units and providers; processing and implementation of ML techniques to develop stochastic forecasting or classification algorithms, mainly based on artificial neural networks (Artificial Neural Networks-ANN's); provision of functional versions of these algorithms to authorized information systems through parametric web services. In the healthcare sector, the collaboration between industry and academic/research partners is crucial as it can address a diachronic need: Bridging the gap between research results and their practical application. It has been declared that: "Machine learning offers a cornucopia of useful ways to approach problems that otherwise defy manual solution. However, much current ML research suffers from a growing detachment from those real problems. Many investigators withdraw into their private studies with a copy of the data set and work in isolation to perfect algorithmic performance. Publishing results to the ML community is the end of the process. Successes usually are not communicated back to the original problem setting, or not in a form that can be used." ML methods in the health sector will provide solutions to real-world problems only if they are designed for real environment implementations. The development of the MODELHealth platform aims at the creation of the mechanisms and infrastructures that will enable the application of health-related ML algorithms in real environments with maximum efficiency and minimum cost. The project focuses on the implementation of ML in the demanding field of health, aspiring to reduce its research requirements essentially. When the project is completed, the implementation and spreading of the use of ML techniques in health data will be facilitated. The ultimate goal of the proposed intervention is the enhancement of the quality of the services provided as well as of the working conditions of healthcare professionals while reducing the total cost. MODELHealth, following a holistic approach for the implementation of ML processes, is an integrated platform that provides a health organization the ability not only to use existing research results but also to carry out its own research at the minimum cost. In addition to the flexibility and cost advantage of cloud infrastructure, provided as a subscription-based service, MODELHealth aspires to be an attractive solution, in terms of quality and cost efficiency.
