Crude oil is one of the most important fuel sources on the planet, accounting for more than a third of global energy use in the past. Crude oil is a key factor in balancing import and export for many countries due to its importance as a source of energy. Crude oil price shocks have a significant impact on aggregate macroeconomic indices like GDP, interest rates, investment, inflation, unemployment, and currency rates. Economic impact of oil price changes is asymmetrical, with the negative impact of higher oil prices being greater than the beneficial impact of lower oil prices. Even a minor price rise can result in significant losses. According to studies, a 10% increase in oil prices equates to 0.6 to 2.5 percent GDP growth in the United States. Therefore, it becomes crucial for researchers and economists alike to have a fair idea of swings in crude oil price. To predict the crude oil price, researchers have proposed various predictive techniques in the past. In the recent past, machine learning (ML) techniques have taken precedence over traditional econometrics' techniques. Some of the reasons for the growing popularity of ML in energy economics can be found in a comparison of its properties to those of traditional econometric models. The advantage of machine learning algorithms over traditional statistics/econometrics methods is that they can handle enormous amounts of structured and unstructured data and produce quick conclusions or forecasts. They operate on non-parametric assumptions. In the proposed model, the researchers have focused on three econometric factors like CPI, GDP, and Gold Prices (USD) to predict the crude oil price. Overall, six machine learning models namely Linear Regression, CART, Generalized Linear Model, ARIMA, ARIMAX, and VAR are used to predict the crude oil price. The yearly data has been used for the experiment ranging from 1978 to 2020. From the result obtained through the experiment, it has been proven that traditional models like ARIMAX could efficiently predict the correct crude oil price from the other independent variables. The performance of the models could be significantly improved after applying the feature engineering techniques. ARIMA and VAR models have been used to further forecast the crude oil price for 5 years ahead. The result of the ARIMA model shows a downtrend for the upcoming years, which has been accepted by the researchers considering the predictive efficiency of the models under study. The further research paper contains related research work by other researchers in section II followed by the philosophical underpinning of the research in section III. Section IV describes the research methodology followed by the results and observations in section V. Finally, section VI concludes the research work by suggesting further research opportunities for the reader. The current research is aimed to understand the impact of various macroeconomic factors like GDP, CPI, and US Dollar on crude oil prices, which is a key factor in balancing import and export for many countries due to its importance as a source of energy. Various regression models are implemented to predict crude oil prices, amongst which the ARMAX has shown the lowest RMSE and highest accuracy of the predictions. The US Dollar and CPI have observed showing the highest impact on the crude oil price. Considering the prediction accuracy, ARIMA model’s results are recommended to forecast the crude oil price for 5 years ahead. As per the ARIMA model, the crude oil price will go down in the upcoming years, which may affect the investments of investors investing in the crude oil price. In the future, current work can be enhanced by considering more macroeconomic variables like supply and demand levels, the impact of GDP, COVID-19, OPEC reserves, YEN/USD, Euro/USD, and crude oil properties for model selection and applying deep learning techniques like CNN & ANN or hybrid of econometrics and deep learning models to capture nonlinear trends.
