A single piece of text may contain one or more emotions. A single-label emotion classification task aims to predict only one emotion of a text. The main drawback of single-label emotion classification is that it only captures one emotion in a given text, making it difficult to completely understand the author's emotional state. Multi-label emotion classification overcomes this limitation by capturing all possible emotions in a given text, see examples in Table 1. Consequently, we can make a more accurate judgment about the emotional state of an author. Multi-label emotion classification has potential applications in various domains. For example, in E-learning, multi-label emotion classification can adjust the learning techniques in conformity with the learner. Multi-label emotion classification can be helpful in health care to determine the feelings and comfort level of the patient towards the treatment. Multi-label emotion classification can be used, for example, in stock market monitoring or prioritizing calls in a call center. In general, code-mixing can be characterized as the use of two or more languages at the same time. According to [1], more than 50% of Europeans use other languages besides their mother language. The internet is the most prominent source in promoting global, linguistic code-mixed culture. In the South Asian community and particularly in Pakistan, code-mixed (English and Roman Urdu) text became a preferable script for Facebook comments/posts [2], tweets [3]–[5], and daily communication using SMS messages [6]. It can be noted from these studies that the use of code-mixed digital text is increasing. Thus, there is a need to develop standard evaluation resources and methods for code-mixed texts for various applications, such as author profiling, sentiment analysis, emotion analysis, etc. Standard evaluation resources are needed to develop, evaluate, and compare multi-label emotion classification methods. Previous studies developed few corpora for multi-label emotion classification using English tweets (monolingual) [7]–[10]. However, the problem of multi-label emotion classification is not explored for code-mixed (say, English and Roman Urdu) texts. To fulfill this research gap, the present study aims to develop a large benchmark code-mixed (English and Roman Urdu) corpus for the multi-label emotion classification task and evaluate it. The two main objectives of this study are: (1) to develop a large benchmark code-mixed (English and Roman Urdu) SMS messages corpus for multi-label emotion classification task and (2) to apply, evaluate, and compare state-of-the-art classical machine learning, deep learning, and transfer learning methods on the proposed corpus to investigate the most suitable methods for multi-label emotion classification on a code-mixed corpus. For the first objective, we developed a large benchmark multi-label emotion classification corpus, which contains 11,914 code-mixed (English and Roman Urdu) multi-label SMS messages, hereafter called CM-MEC-21 corpus. In the CM-MEC-21 corpus, each code-mixed SMS message is manually annotated from a predefined set of 12 emotions, which are: anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, love, optimism, pessimism, sadness, surprise, trust, and neutral (no emotion). For the second objective, we developed and applied state-of-the-art classical machine learning, deep learning, and transfer learning methods on our proposed CM-MEC-21 corpus. We believe that our proposed CM-MEC-21 corpus will be helpful for: (1) promotion of research in an under-resourced language, i.e., Roman Urdu, (2) development of bilingual dictionaries for English and Roman Urdu languages, (2) carrying out a detailed comparison of existing methods for the multi-label emotion classification task, and (4) development and evaluation of new methods for multi-label emotion classification on code-mixed text (in our case, English and Roman Urdu). The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the existing multi-label emotion classification corpora and methods. Section III presents the corpus compilation process used to create the proposed corpus. Section IV describes methods for multi-label emotion classification task. Section V presents the experimental setup (dataset, techniques, evaluation methodology, and evaluation measures). Results and their analysis are presented in Section VI. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper and discusses potential avenues for future work. Code-mixed (English and Roman Urdu) text is widely used, especially in the South Asian community. However, it is not explored for the multi-label emotion classification problem. As described in this paper, our novel contribution is a newly developed and publicly available benchmark code-mixed and multi-label SMS messages-based corpus for the multi-label emotion classification task. The corpus consists of 11,914 code-mixed multi-label SMS messages manually annotated for the presence/absence of the following 12 emotions: anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, love, optimism, pessimism, sadness, surprise, trust, and neutral (no emotion). In addition to dataset creation, we applied state-of-the-art machine learning (content-based 3-word n-gram features and eight character n-gram features), deep learning, and transfer learning-based methods for the multi-label emotion classification task on our proposed CM-MEC-21 corpus. The best results (see Table 8) were obtained using state-of-the-art machine learning methods with word uni-gram (Micro F1 D 0.67) and OVR multi-label machine learning algorithm when training on code-mixed (Train-CM-CM-MEC-21) and testing by combining code-mixed, Roman Urdu, and English (Test-CM-CM-MEC-21 C Test-E-CM-MEC-21 C Test-RUCM-MEC-21) multi-label SMS messages. In the future, we plan to apply other transfer learning-based models such as RoBERTa, DistilBERT, etc., to our proposed corpus. An ensemble of the model would be considered to increase classification performance.
