As potential customers, people usually seek help from the online portals to gain knowledge on a particular product, and finally, decide if the purchase should be made or not. It takes several hours to read all the reviews, sometimes even leading to missing out the important ones, thus ending up making the wrong decision on purchasing the product. Each product has thousands of reviews each, and it is tedious for the customer to make a decision based on the varying user reviews. A more well defined and concise product review is proposed such that the user need not skim through all the reviews, thus saving their time and effort. As a solution to the ongoing problem that the customer experiences daily, automatic review summarization will be used to analyze the product reviews and convert them into a user-readable and in a more concise and precise format. In this section the predicted summarized results obtained from the model sequence to sequence will be shown. The User Inputs the Product ID whose Summary is to be found and after clicking on “check review” the summary is viewed. The above figure represents the sentimental analysis of Products. The blue bar shows the percentage of reviews which were positive and red shows the number of negative reviews. For the considered model the 2nd and 3rd product have negligible negative comments as compared to the 1st product. The yellow line represents neutral comments which map to the reviews which had a mixed type of statements i.e. the user is stating something good about one feature of the product and negative for some other. Sentimental Analysis is first applied to the pre-processed text reviews after which the sequence to sequence encoder-decoder along with an attention layer is used for our summarization process such that the semantics of the reviews are still maintained, thus helping us achieve the desired results. Implementing the above-mentioned techniques, positive satisfactory results have been obtained that can be improved further by using window model so the model can take the entire paragraph at a time and hence produce only one output for that. The model can be trained more rigorously by giving a Dataset which has the summary Product based and not review based and hence it would be possible to implement rouge and BLEU techniques to check the predicted summary’s accuracy.
