Machine learning (ML) has become in recent years an essential tool not only in the field of academic research but also in business and industrial applications. Due to the improvement experienced by hardware devices in recent years, an increasing number of companies in many different business areas have decided to take advantage of ML technologies to analyze the large amounts of data they need to manage. For many years a huge research effort has been devoted to the integration of ML tools and relational database management systems (RDBMSs), either implementing ML algorithms in RDBMSs or implementing well-known database optimization techniques in ML tools. However, this research effort devoted to relational databases has not been reflected in the field of array databases. Taking into account that (1) increasingly large amounts of data are generated every day, and (2) a relevant part of them are array data, leveraging the efficiency of array databases for the analysis of array data in ML applications is essential. Therefore, the most efficient tools in array data analysis will allow users to boost analysis capabilities in many and diverse application domains such as cancer detection, pollution analysis, weather forecasting and environmental classification. An outline of this tutorial with estimated time duration, covering a full length of 1.5 hours, and relevant references is shown below. Moreover, a hands-on session on how to implement analytics on an array DBMS is proposed for a duration of 1.5 hours. Array data and Array DBMSs (20’). A brief summary on array data model and current array DBMSs. ML applications over array data (15’). Array data in ML applications through real application examples. Main drawbacks of using non-specific array databases are pointed out. Analytics on array DBMSs (25’). An overview on expected analytics on array DBMSs. Specific use cases of analytics with application examples will be pointed out. ML in Array Databases (30’). A review of current leading array databases and their ML capabilities. Implementation examples of ML algorithms will be provided. Hands-on session (90’). Both data scientists and researchers on the broad areas of ML and databases are encouraged to attend this tutorial. On one hand, data scientists will learn the current ML capabilities of on-production array databases and how to leverage both a specific array query language and a generic Python API. On the other hand, researchers will learn the state-of-the-art contributions on the integration of ML algorithms in array databases. A basic knowledge on linear algebra, ML algorithms and array data management is advisable. There is no specific technical requirement that limits the maximum number of participants. A tutorial at the ICDE conference will increase the importance of this topic. Top-level data scientists, and database and machine learning researchers not only will learn about state-of-art solutions on the topic but also will learn how to implement ML algorithms in current array databases. Participants will be encouraged to join the current research effort devoted to the topic. And they also will notice the large number of opportunities for new research contributions and results. Several issues arise when designing and implementing ML algorithms in array databases. A key feature that allows array databases to achieve good performance is related to the efficient implementation of linear algebra operations on distributed array data. Current ML algorithms may have to perform computations on large matrices because both the training dataset matrix and the model matrix may be very large. When these matrices do not fit in main memory, both data and model need to be distributed. Fortunately, array databases can model these matrices as distributed arrays and provide efficient storage techniques. However, the efficient implementation of linear algebra operations (e.g., matrix multiplication) involving such distributed arrays still remains as a challenging problem which deserves research efforts. One of the most important research topics is related to the declarative specification of iterative algorithms. Currently, many array databases provide SQL-based query languages but do not provide constructs for implementing FOR loops. But even if they were provided, their execution would not be efficient. Thus, constructs for declarative specification of such iteration algorithms in provided query languages are required. Related to the above, declarative specification of iterative algorithms give rise to very large execution plans. How array databases can compile and execute these large and complex computations is also a challenging research topic. By implementing machine learning algorithms in array databases users can boost the native efficient array data processing with machine learning methods to perform accurate and fast array data analytics.
