For any Internet of Things (IoT) and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) framework, sensors are the fundamental devices for generating data. They are responsible for sensing, processing, and storing data. These data are important for many decision-making policies. Thus, the reliability of any data is of utmost importance in any application. The sensors have limited resources and capability, thus making the data generated by the sensors often unreliable and inaccurate. These sensors are battery-operated and when these batteries get replenished, the possibility of getting erroneous data increases by many folds. Environmental effects also play a major role in the operation of the sensor nodes. Be it IoT or WSN, the main aim is the data communication between devices without any human intervention. Thus, the sensors are also susceptible to malicious attacks in which the data are exploited by adversaries. All these factors contribute to the unreliability of the sensor data which ultimately influence the final decision-making process. Thus, outliers can be deemed a very important factor which affects the data quality. Any field which is concerned with data collection is majorly affected by outliers like weather monitoring, fraud and intrusion detection, sensor faults in heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, traffic anomaly detection, etc. In recent times, machine learning has proven to be a very powerful method to detect outliers in sensor data. In this brief survey, some of the works which have addressed the issue of outlier detection using machine learning techniques are outlined. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the basics of outliers in IoT and WSN. Section III gives a summary of the different machine learning techniques used for detecting outliers in IoT and WSN followed by Section IV which provides the important research areas that need to be focused on. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. In this work, various machine learning techniques which detect outliers in IoT and WSN have been described. In IoT and WSN frameworks, sensors form the crux of generating raw data and are also responsible for detecting environmental changes. Thus, detecting outliers is much needed to analyze error-free data generated from sensors. Some works have also been tabulated which are useful in detecting various kinds of outliers in sensor data. It can be easily concluded from the discussion that classification methods are the most extensively used learning methods for detecting outliers in IoT and WSN. The existing shortcomings in both IoT and WSN require developing more suitable outlier detection techniques for both univariate and multivariate data. Also, while developing new machine learning methods, mobility of node and network topology change should also be seriously considered.
