According to World Health Organization reports, approximately 3.8 million men and 3.4 million women worldwide die each year due to Coronary Artery Disease (CAD), a leading cause of cardiovascular mortality globally. Two thirds of patients die even before reaching the hospital. Clinically, CAD may either remain asymptomatic for a long period or manifest as life-threatening Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS). Coronary Angiography (CAG), a gold standard investigation for definitive diagnosis of CAD, requires well-equipped labs and is a costly procedure. Also, it is highly exacting to identify genuine patients for CAG referrals at the primary point of contact when the patient load is high and quick decision-making is required. CAG referrals are based on scores of ACS triage tools at the emergency departments, whereas screening tests like exercise stress tests and stress echocardiography are used at secondary care centers. Unfortunately, these tests have known limitations, contraindications, and moderate sensitivities. Some of the limitations include the high cost of devices used for stress tests and limited availability of professionals with expertise in interpreting the results of these tests. It is therefore important to develop a screening tool for prediction of CAD that not only overcomes these limitations but is also cost-effective and easy to use even at the first point of contact. There has been an indication of association between Electrocardiography (ECG), a measurement of electrical activity in the heart, and CAD. Being non-invasive in nature and a low-cost procedure with wide operational availability, the use of ECG to develop a promising screening tool merits research. However, wide inter- and intra-individual variations in ECG records of patients make it a challenging task to effectively use ECG data to screen CAD patients. With the upsurge of applications of statistical machine learning and deep learning in healthcare over the past few years, multiple studies have attempted to predict CAD with various biomarkers such as Heart Rate Variability (HRV), genetic variations, etc. The aim of the present study is to explore the utility of ECG as a screening tool for CAD. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces viewers to previous work on CAD prediction and detection. Section 3 provides our data collection process. Section 4 presents the methodology of our study, divided into two parts: Feature Extraction/Selection and application of machine learning algorithms for CAD prediction using these features. Section 5 lists the results obtained using algorithms developed in Section 4. In Section 6, we discuss our conclusions. In comparison to other studies, our results have wider clinical applicability. In a study conducted by the best predictor model was based on the Random Forest Classifier using HRV measured from 24-hour ECG in hypertensive patients, which showed sensitivity and specificity of 71.4% and 87.8% respectively. However, recording a 24-hour ECG is an impractical choice if screening for CAG has to be done at the first point of contact. The authors developed a multi-parametric measure for classifying normal subjects (20 cases) from patients suffering from two types of CAD (64 cases), i.e., Angina Pectoris (AP) and Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS). The measure was constructed using multiple discriminant analysis of several linear and non-linear parameters extracted from ECG signals. The authors obtained accuracies of 75.0%, 72.5%, and 84.6% for control, AP, and ACS groups respectively. The authors used a multilayer perceptron on HRV indices and achieved the highest classification accuracy of 89.5% for prediction of CAD. In all the experiments mentioned above, small sample sizes (ranging from a minimum of 10 in each group to a maximum of 90) and controlled recording conditions were considered, and therefore, the real-life utility of these algorithms is not clear. Moreover, a majority of these studies have reported accuracy rather than sensitivity and specificity of the test, weakening the confidence in their clinical applicability. We obtained a specificity and sensitivity of 88.79% and 87.17% using the XGBoost Classifier. These results are superior to the available screening tests, such as stress tests (specificity range is 70% - 80% and sensitivity range is 60% - 70%). ECG-based machine learning solutions are highly suitable versatile screening tools. Compared to other screening and triage tests, obtaining ECG is simple, non-invasive, and cost-effective, and therefore can be performed even at the first point of contact.
