Early explorations and results in the subfield of quantum machine learning (QML) have been promising and show the potential for productivity improvements for certain machine learning (ML) tasks, including classification, image generation, and natural language processing, due to quantum circuits’ natural ability to encode and manipulate a large amount of information simultaneously. QML is still in its early exploration stages and the theoretical quantum advantage is still being investigated and debated. Nevertheless, there is a consistent and rising interest in QML from industry, academia, and research organizations – including the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). Notably, QML explorations and their potential are not limited to speedup over classical counterparts. In fact, a recent article points out that QML explorations should not be confined to proving a speed-up – for example, QML is expected to have strong potential to recognize patterns or correlations that its classical counterparts could miss. As expected, most prior QML efforts have focused on leveraging quantum computing technologies with early commercial offerings (e.g., superconducting, trapped-ion). However, photonics quantum computing is emerging as a competitive quantum technology due to its unique advantages. These advantages include large decoherence time, room-temperature execution, and easier integration potential with classical optical components (desirable for the development of hybrid quantum-classical systems). Recently, photonics quantum computing has been shown to be promising for a variety of applications, including Gaussian Boson Sampling, drug discovery, graph applications, etc. However, the feasibility of a machine learning classifier on photonics quantum computing platforms has not been well explored. As we discuss, this is because it is challenging to design an effective QML classifier for real-system photonics quantum devices because of the current small scale of photonic devices, the fixed circuit structure of these devices, the limited number of physical parameters, and photon loss and noise on real systems. Therefore, our goal is to build a noise-aware and photon loss-aware photonics QML classifier. This work makes multiple contributions — a summary of key contributions and results is listed below. To the best of our knowledge, ProxiML is the first experimental demonstration of competitive ML classification on a photonic quantum device despite the current small scale, the machine-enforced fixed quantum circuit structure, a limited number of tunable parameters, and photon loss and noise on real systems. ProxiML designs a novel noise-aware parametric encoding scheme that can encode a high number of input features despite a limited number of physical gate parameters, and it enhances the expressibility of the small-size photonic quantum circuit. ProxiML’s parametric encoding distributes the input features among all physical gates instead of being concentrated on only a few gates – to mitigate the loss and noise effects on a real machine. ProxiML leverages virtual parameters to effectively share limited physical gate parameters among input features and training parameters. The photonic quantum computing system can have a prohibitively large number of non-zero probability output states due to infinite basis states. While powerful in many contexts, it makes machine learning-based training challenging. We discover the conventional wisdom of comparing the probability of the highest probability state to a fixed threshold can be suboptimal because the highest probability state can be very sensitive to photon loss on a real machine. In response to this challenge, ProxiML designs a novel noise-aware scheme to select and compare multiple output states – the key insight to ProxiML’s selection of states is to ensure these states are equiprobable and affected by photon loss/noise by a similar magnitude. To counter the effect of photon loss, a tempting strategy is to use all photon-generating gates during the state preparation phase. Surprisingly, ProxiML discovers that selectively choosing the photon generation gates is more noise-aware as it increases the maximum possible probability of a certain type of output states – which leads to faster training and enhanced noise-awareness. ProxiML ensures that this selective activation of photon generation gates still avoids the skewed impact of a single faulty gate. Our extensive evaluation on a real photonic device (Xanadu X8 machine) and simulation confirm the effectiveness of ProxiML machine learning classifier. ProxiML’s real-system experimental campaign spanned over three months on the X8 machine. On Xanadu’s X8 machine, ProxiML achieves over 95% and 90% accuracy for the most challenging binary and four-class classification tasks on the MNIST dataset, respectively. ProxiML scales to both a higher number of classes and futuristic machines with larger qumodes – achieving 81% accuracy on 10-class classification task on X16 machine. ProxiML is the first work to demonstrate competitive ML classification on a photonic quantum device despite the current expected limitations of photonic quantum devices. Our experimental results on Xanadu’s X8 machine have empirically demonstrated that photonic quantum computing holds dramatic promise and requires further investigation and investment. ProxiML design elements are broadly generic and useful in a general context – targeted to mitigate noise and photon loss on photonic quantum hardware. So, we anticipate that future quantum machine learning (QML) and non-QML works on photonic quantum hardware will leverage the key design elements of ProxiML. We recognize that comparing a photonic QML classifier with non-photonic QML classifiers is non-trivial, and an apples-to-apples comparison is not possible. Nevertheless, we are hopeful that ProxiML’s higher accuracy on Xanadu’s X8 machine compared to reported accuracy from prior state-of-the-art QML works on other quantum computing technologies will encourage other researchers to pursue photonic quantum hardware as a promising technology for future advancement in the QML area. We recognize that the commercialization of photonic quantum devices is at a nascent stage, but accelerated progress has been made in the last few years. We anticipate ProxiML’s open-source framework serve as a catalyst for the ASPLOS community to design future frameworks on photonic quantum devices for different quantum ML tasks.
