The information generated from different domains like sports, medical, entertainment, surveillance, bulletin, etc. is in digital format and it's difficult to store this large amount of information efficiently. To make video browsing and retrieval easier, video summarization can be of great help. Video summarization is the process of creating and presenting the highlights of a video in a short duration. Using video summarization, users will be able to view abstracts of lengthy videos, which makes it easier to extract maximum information within less time. An individual can get a visual abstract of a long film using the method known as video summarization. The input can be an image or moving images, as video is essentially a series of images displayed sequentially at a speed that makes them appear moving. Generated video summaries can be mainly of two types: static and dynamic. Static summary generation refers to a storyboard comprised of related keyframes. These relevant keyframes, which are part of the original video sequence, are selected to produce the desired summary of the video. These keyframes are considered highlighted parts of the original input video. Generation of the static summary is divided into four main sections: selecting key frames, feature extraction, grouping frames, and skimming of keyframes. Dynamic summary generation refers to video skims that consist of the most relevant parts or events of the input video, which are termed as segments. These video segments have both audio and video content. The generation of a dynamic video summary has three main sections: segmentation of video, score prediction, and selection of segments. While studying and surveying video summarization, some nomenclatures are used which the user needs to keep note of and understand. There are increasing numbers of security cameras that offer single- or multi-view coverage. In comparison to single-view cameras, dispersed video cameras provide superior scene coverage and generate a disproportionately large amount of video data. Rare events are contained in this big data; however, most of them are redundant frames with no useful information. The requirement for multi-view summarization approaches arises from the necessity to extract prominent elements from such big data. A summary of video summarization methods, their datasets, and the performance criteria used to analyze them has been provided. The application-specific distribution, the generic flow, and concise discussion of datasets can guide researchers to various single and multi-view video summarization deployment directions, such as industry sectors, law and order, healthcare, education, surveillance, and entertainment. It has been discovered that the multi-view summarization problem is not being sufficiently addressed, even though it is required for many applications. The examined literature reveals that most of the study to date has focused on artisanal or mid-level features. This study makes some recommendations for further research into how to make video summarizing systems more efficient and effective. In addition to these suggestions for upcoming investigation, it is believed that more work can be done on the real-time application of summarization methodologies by embedding such cutting-edge technology into systems that meet the needs of contemporary news agencies for making it time-effective and reusable.
