Asset pricing modeling targeting uncertainty and parameter instability has become a hot issue in empirical finance research in the last decade. Many studies have tried to improve the accuracy of forecasts in finance and economics with new methods. Combination forecasting was first put forward empirically in Rapach et al (2010); this method gives weights to different models and combines them in an all-together linear regression to reach a better performance result. Nonetheless, these researches are largely limited to linear regression. In order to pursue a higher explanation ability, the utilization of machine learning methods is getting favored and very prevalent nowadays. This paper puts forward an empirical method to combine heterogeneous models together. For machine learning, different learners perform disparate effects when predicting the same sample of data. As shown above, previous studies mainly focused on the optimization of a particular model and achieved the optimal solution. Nonetheless, for practical purposes, a single classification or regression model may not be able to achieve the best prediction. According to the weak learner integration theory, as long as the learning effect of each learner is not the same, it is possible for us to improve the final prediction performance by "learning from each other," so as to achieve better results than a single learner. Consequently, this paper aims at putting forward a novel stacking method to integrate various machine learning models in predicting stock markets and achieve improvement in prediction accuracy. The targeted main contribution of this paper is to offer a combination framework in financial time series prediction. Forecast combinations based on linear regression have met multifarious implementations in economics and finance. Nonetheless, as machine learning techniques are getting more popularity for their higher accuracy and flexibility in prediction, the realm for combinations based on machine learning methods is largely understudied. Any highly parameterized model may suffer from overfitting and parameter uncertainty, thus lowering its out-of-sample forecast ability. In this paper, we propose using an advanced stacking combination to address such issues. Based on 12 economic variables, we built 11 different frameworks encompassing the most popular machine learning methods on different time horizons, then used a 3-layer stacking method to combine the heterogeneous prediction of each framework and reach out an elevated performance. We also examined the relative importance of each input variable and validated the robustness of our combination method. There are two aspects of further improvement in this paper. One is the resource of data, for we merely obtained 12 independent variables. If more variables are considered comprehensively, a more promising result is expected. Second, it leaves room for further study in choosing and picking the right base learners. In our research, removing some base models that performed significantly less well than other models would elevate our framework's predictability since the weak learners that perform poorly could impose a negative effect on the stacking outcome. To conclude, this paper offers an innovative approach for predicting stock market return and sheds light on the role of "learning from each other" in improving forecast accuracy.
