Rate of Return shows a profitable investment over a certain time, and Net Present Value is an essential factor. In equation 1, cash flow is calculated for a house in each period K, and ’re’ is a satisfactory rate of return. One of the essential factors in measuring the Net Present Value of investment is cash flow. Rent, house mortgage, annual house tax, annual house expenses can affect Cash flow. House rent positively affects cash flow, but the higher vacancy rate can create a negative cash flow. Several machine learning techniques are used for rent prediction. Greenland investigates eager methods like bagging REP trees to predict rent price for residents near the university campus, and bagging REP trees provides the best prediction accuracy. However, the coverage area of the training set is limited zip codes near the university campus. So, their solution can generate a biased model since all data has the same Geo location characteristics. The previous predictive models for rent price did not consider the house type and zip code at the same time. Rent variances can be very high for properties, even in the same city. For instance, the zip codes 20143 and 20105 are in the same neighborhood, but the average rent prices are not similar. The rent price is also based on area space, bedrooms, bathrooms, community factors, etc. The average rent price for a zipcode depends on internal and external factors such as walking score, transit score, and crime rate of a zip code. The transit score indicates the connectivity or access to essential services. Crime score shows different violent incidents based on specific zip code. Lazy learning models find the local optimal solutions for each test instance by storing the training instances and postpone the generalization until a new instance arrives. This research uses multiple online resources for real estate knowledge extraction by using different natural language processing approaches. Deep learning architectures can be powerful tools in text processing of online reviews. People share their ideas about different business topics in social media platforms. Data from public and personal blogs can be valuable for improving online data collection phase, and this data can be categorized based on different topics in real estate. Homeowners and homebuyers express their ideas in both positive and negative ways on online platforms. So for each house, the sentiment score can be calculated by the sentiment classification of home owners. Also, if the online review has a limited number of words, by using advanced sentiment classification techniques, we can assign a sentiment score to each online review. The Polarization of ideas in the real estate market to promote buyers to buy real estate properties in specific cities can be recognized by polarization detection methods in social media platforms. It is also essential to detect Discrimination or social relations in online comment’s text in rent price in different areas in the cities. Real estate companies can use homebuyers’ emotions to make specific real estate deals, so it is vital to do emotion classification in the home owner’s comments to feed the classifiers with more reliable data. Real estate websites show the houses in each zip code based on the price map; pictures with similar price tags can be recognized by image caption generation techniques. Also, the comparison between the house images by expert image processing techniques can detect pictures of the homes which have more number of views by home buyers. These images can show the customer interest in the real estate market about specific house types. Chatbots can be used to analyze more verbal and textual data shared in social media platforms about the real estate market. In this work, to compensate for the computational time of NLP algorithms, we optimize hardware and power usage by using memory-efficient methods. We optimized memory usage by using for intensive data workload. The advanced design of hierarchical convolutional neural networks is used in this research to accelerate processing time. Convolutional neural network models are examined in different scientific domains such as Cyber security, health, business applications. The business deal recommender system in this research is based on convolutional neural network models. In this research, the classification of real estate properties into profitable rental properties and not profitable provides investors with a model to make a safe business investment. This work contribution can be summarized in 3 main points: first, Using the BERT model as a bidirectional transformer for sentiment classification of online reviews based on different online resources to detect profitable rental properties. Second, using semantic CNN model to extract the deep context of online housing reviews. The new CNN model improves prediction accuracy very significantly. Third, a new public data set of more than five million houses with its sentiment score and semantic information. The new data set will be available for machine learning research, especially in the real estate market research.
