As we all know, machine learning algorithms use a range of developmental, mathematical, and probabilistic techniques to learn from data generated from past events and use them in higher cognitive processes. The enhancement of AI has enabled computer systems to recognize, think, and act intelligently like human beings. Machine learning algorithms are considered to be utilized in a good range of fields including network login recognition, customer acquisition behavior detection, production process improvement, Mastercard fraud detection, and disease predictions. Many of those applications are built using the ML supervised method. During this way, records with labels have been delivered to hypothesis models that expect non-label models. This implies the thought that medical doctors can use supervised learning as a robust tool for diagnosing diseases effectively. According to our study, general mathematical techniques, work experience, and understanding of medical professionals led to unpopular selections and errors when detecting disease-related risks. With the rapid proliferation of electronic health data, medical doctors are facing the challenge of diagnosing diseases accurately in advance. For this reason, advanced calculation methods such as supervised ML algorithms are introduced to detect logical patterns and hidden information from data, which can be used to make critical decisions. As a result, the burden on medical staff will be decreased, and the death rate of patients will be reduced and survival rate will be enhanced. The project is built so far that the system takes symptoms from the user as input and generates output i.e. disease prediction. The user can select at least one to five symptoms. Less accuracy will be obtained if only one input is selected. The greater the number of inputs, the greater the accuracy. In this paper, we have proposed a learning model for a compact novel machine learning algorithm of Naïve Bayes. We also tried to reduce the number of features from the dataset. In this process, we were able to obtain sufficient accuracy for all datasets using our machine learning model. We found the best accuracy of the most disease is approximately 78.6%. In upcoming work, the development of complex ML algorithms is extremely necessary for enhancement of disease prediction. Additionally, datasets should be expanded to different demographics to avoid overcrowding and to extend the accuracy of the models used. Finally, we’ll try and put all the medical reports into this, especially the last 10-20 medical records, in order that everything should be smooth and our system will alleviate the burden of medical staff and lots of aspects.
