The stock market is one of the oldest methods where a normal person would trade stocks, make investments, and earn some money out of companies that sell a part of themselves on this platform. This system proves to be a potential investment scheme if done wisely. However, the prices and the liquidity of this platform are highly unpredictable, and this is where we bring technology to help us out. Machine learning is one such tool that helps us achieve what we want. The following three paragraphs will briefly explain the key components of this paper: Stock market as we know is a very important trading platform which affects everyone at an individual and national level. The basic principle is quite simple; companies will list their shares in the companies as small commodities called stocks. They do so in order to raise money for the firm. A company lists its stock at a price called the IPO or initial public offering. This is the offer price at which the company sells the stock and raises money. After which these stocks are the property of the owner, and he may sell them at any price to a buyer at an exchange such as BSE or Bombay Stock Exchange. Traders and buyers continue selling these shares at their own price, but the company only gets to keep the money made during the IPO. The continual hopping of shares from one party to another in order to make more profits results in an increase in the price of the particular share after every profitable transaction. However, if the company issues more stocks at a lower IPO, then the market price for exchange goes down and traders suffer a loss. This exact phenomenon is the reason for the fear people have in investing in stock markets and the reason for the fall and rise of stock prices in a nutshell. Now, if we try to graph the stock exchange price over a time period (say 6 months), is it really hard to predict the next outcome on the graph? A human brain is very capable of extending the graph a few coordinates by just simply looking at it for a few minutes. And if we crowd compute, i.e., make a group of random people try to extend the graph by a fixed amount of time (say a week), we will get a very reasonable and approximate answer to a real-life graph. Because many brains will try to interpret the pattern and make a guess, this activity has proven to be a lot more successful in practice than it seems in theory. Having said that, predicting the true value of the stock is best estimated by the method of crowd computing. But as it is very much evident that crowd computing is a very slow activity, therefore, we try to use a computer here to simulate such an example with a more scientific and mathematical approach. In statistics, there is a way where we look at the values and attributes of a problem in graphs and identify the dependents and independent variables and try to establish or identify an existing relationship amongst them. This technique is known as linear regression in statistics and is very commonly used due to its very simple and effective approach. In machine learning, we have adapted the same algorithm where we use the features to train the classifier which then predicts the value of the label with certain accuracy which can be checked while training and testing of the classifier. For a classifier to be accurate, you must select the right features and have enough data to train your classifier. The accuracy of your classifier is directly proportional to the amount of data provided to the classifier and the attributes selected. So with the basic knowledge of the stock market, graphs, and data analysis coupled with machine learning, we are now prepared to devise the program. Machine learning, as we have seen till now, is a very powerful tool and, as evident, it has some great applications. We have seen till now that machine learning is very much dependent upon data. Thus, it is important to understand that data is quite invaluable and as simple as it may sound, data analysis is not an easy task. Machine learning has found tremendous application and has evolved further into deep learning and neural networks, but the core idea is more or less the same for all of them. This paper delivers a smooth insight into how to implement machine learning. There are various ways, methods, and techniques available to handle and solve various problems in different situations imaginable. This paper is limited to only supervised machine learning and tries to explain only the fundamentals of this complex process.
