Improving the level of refined wind speed forecasting is a demand for refined weather forecasting services in many industries. Machine learning has many applications in the field of meteorology, including the use of machine learning for observation and evaluation of live conditions and for improving performance in weather data pre-processing, but its main application is the continuous tuning and optimization of numerical forecasts using machine learning related algorithms. In recent years, the development of machine learning has brought new methods for error correction of meteorological data. Sun Q D et al. pointed out that all three machine learning methods (LASSO regression, random forest, and deep learning) had better correction results than MOS methods. Fu X D et al. used the random forest algorithm to construct a 1-6h wind field forecast model, and the accuracy of the model forecasts was generally high. A multi-model ensemble forecast analysis of four numerical models for day-by-day surface 2m temperature forecasts using machine learning was performed by Men X L et al. The forecasts were significantly better than the ensemble forecasts and individual weather forecast models in any forecast time. It could be seen that the revised model based on the machine learning method can capture the non-linear changes of meteorological elements and revise the weather forecast data better than the traditional numerical model forecasts. There are many algorithms for machine learning, which are generally classified into supervised learning algorithms, unsupervised learning algorithms, and reinforcement learning algorithms based on the learning method. Real-life problems often arise where there is a lack of sufficient a priori knowledge, so that it is difficult to manually label categories or too costly to perform manual category labeling. Solving various problems in pattern recognition based on training samples with unknown (unlabeled) categories is called unsupervised learning. Unsupervised learning algorithms are often applied to the learning of association rules and clustering, etc. Common algorithms include k-Means, autoencoder (AE), etc. Unsupervised machine learning is now used in various fields, such as medicine. In this paper, unsupervised machine learning models were used to model the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), the China Meteorological Administration Global Forecast System (CMA-GFS), and the observation data from meteorological stations, and machine learning corrections were made to the numerical forecasts and weather condition, and the K-fold cross-validation method was used to compare the effects of different built-in models in order to select the optimal model and then output the model to obtain objective forecasts of average and extreme winds at 9 weather stations in the Zhangjiakou Zone of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games. In this paper, we used 5 forecasts from 2 numerical forecasting models, ECMWF and CMA-GFS, and weather station data. The information was processed by bilinear interpolation and linear interpolation. We produced a post-processing model for wind corrections by using an unsupervised learning approach and applied it to the forecasts for average and extreme winds at 9 stations in the Zhangjiakou zone of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games. A comparative evaluation of the forecast effectiveness of the single-model forecast and the machine learning method was conducted during the Beijing Winter Olympic Games Test Games from February 15 to February 26, 2021.
