Climate change poses one of the greatest challenges of our time, affecting ecosystems and the well-being of communities worldwide. Estimating and reducing carbon emissions is crucial in mitigating its effects. Recent estimates suggest that the Information and Communications Technology (ICT) sector contributes ∼2% to global CO2 emissions. As traditional software gets integrated with large Machine Learning (ML) components to create ML-Enabled Systems (MLES), ICT’s CO2 emissions are expected to grow even further. Large ML models repeatedly process vast amounts of data through complex algorithms–often requiring multiple iterations to optimize model parameters for accuracy. This computational demand typically necessitates the use of powerful hardware, such as GPUs or TPUs, which consume substantial amounts of electricity. Additionally, training large-scale ML models, such as those used in natural language processing or image recognition, can take days, weeks, or even months to complete, further exacerbating energy consumption. Therefore, there has been a growing call within the artificial intelligence (AI) community to emphasize the mitigation of environmental footprint linked to the development, deployment, and maintenance of AI models, especially in industrial contexts. Since 2008, the software industry has witnessed the rise of DevOps, promoting collaborative synergy between development and operations teams of traditional software. This methodology optimized workflows, nurtured efficiency and effectiveness in software development and operations. Nevertheless, the conventional DevOps approach is not viable for ML-Enabled Systems (MLES) due to the unique challenges associated with such systems (e.g., data dependencies, boundary erosion, continuous learning) that require specialized deployment and maintenance processes. Therefore, as application development progresses, the need for an updated methodology arises, driving a necessary evolution in DevOps. This evolution, crucial in the ML domain, has led to the emergence of MLOps, essentially DevOps customized for ML. MLOps plays a vital role in operationalizing ML in production by automating the entire ML lifecycle, speeding up model development and deployment, and facilitating innovation delivery. This shift has not only enhanced software accuracy but also streamlined development processes. In this work, we analyze how the energy footprint of MLES is assessed through the lens of MLOps pipeline. We also review the approaches and the lessons put forward to minimize it at each of the MLOps phases. The primary contributions of this study are: (i) Reviewing existing research on the environmental impact of MLES. (ii) Conducting a Systematic Mapping Study (SMS) that identifies and examines proposed software engineering practices to evaluate and reduce the environmental cost of MLES within the MLOps methodology. Our study offers a comprehensive overview of community efforts to understand/reduce the environmental impact of MLOps in MLES and contributes towards sustainable engineering of such systems. The subsequent sections of the paper are organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the background and work related to our study. Section 3 outlines the research methodology. Section 4 presents the results and engages in discussions. Finally, Section 5 concludes this work. As traditional software gets integrated with large ML components to form MLESes, ICT’s CO2 emissions are expected to grow even further. While there has been an increased recognition of the environmental cost of MLES, a unified approach towards ensuring sustainability remains elusive. This mapping study presented a thorough examination of methodologies, tools, and metrics employed to assess and mitigate MLES environmental cost and their mapping onto the MLOps pipeline. By analyzing 52 primary studies from 2019 to 2023, our study offered insights into the growing landscape of this field, laying the groundwork for future investigations into eco-friendly strategies for MLES MLOps. The main findings reveal a critical gap in the current practices and strategies for managing the environmental impact of MLES within the MLOps pipeline. Despite the availability of strategies and metrics aimed at assessing the environmental impact of these systems, the study shows that there is no optimal practice for integrating these assessments into the development and operation of MLES. Moreover, our analysis indicates that the majority of existing research is focused on controlled, in vitro environments. Hence, there is a pressing need for more in vivo studies, i.e., field experiments and studies in industrial settings. As future work, we plan to develop foundational concepts and techniques for improving, monitoring, and optimizing the efficiency and sustainability of MLES MLOps pipelines over time.
