There are different types of viruses present all over the world. The paper discusses the machine learning method to detect the presence of a virus named Human T-lymphotropic Virus (HTLV). HTLV is a virus that causes a type of cancer named T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. It is transferred from body to body through body fluids. It is mainly of three types, HTLV-1, HTLV-2, and HTLV-3. HTLV-1 is the most prominent in these three and mainly causes cancer. The prediction of Human papillomavirus (HPV) is another focus. HPV is one of the common viruses that can cause cancer and other genital problems in humans. It enters the body through skin-to-skin contact. There are over 100 types of HPV viruses; not all are harmful to humans, but some are dangerous. Another model is proposed for the prediction of the Hepatitis C virus. Hepatitis C is a viral infection that can cause liver problems, leading to serious liver diseases. It spreads through contaminated blood. Today, many people are infected by Hepatitis C by sharing needles used to inject drugs. Most of the time, it causes short-term illness, but in some people, it becomes chronic. Thus, effective prediction is needed. The paper presents a method for predicting influenza virus pathogenicity. In humans, it can cause flu and other respiratory disorders. It can easily spread via the air and enter the body. Influenza A, B, C, and D are the most common kinds of influenza virus. The pathogenicity of each of these types of viruses is determined by the proposed system. Additionally, a model for Influenza A Virus prediction is provided, employing an ANN-based approach. For feature extraction and analysis, it uses digital signaling techniques like discrete Fourier transform. A model for HIV viral prediction is also proposed. The method is based on monitoring changes in suspected persons' DNA sequences. It clusters the supplied DNA sequences using clustering algorithms. For the prediction, an HMM model is also used. HIV viruses attack the body’s immune system, lowering a person’s immunity. As a result, a minor illness can become serious. Although HIV cannot be totally cured, it can be managed with the right medical care. Another paper based on the HIV virus uses evolving neural networks to predict the use of the R5, X4, and R5X4 coreceptors. HIV is divided into three types: R5, X4, and R5X4. The coreceptors in each of these are different. A model is proposed for the effective identification and prediction of these coreceptors. Drug resistance prediction, like disease prediction, is an important aspect of medical care. The drug resistance of HIV patients is predicted using machine learning algorithms. For drug resistance prediction, multiple regression is performed. The utilization of important antiviral medications will benefit greatly from drug resistance prediction. The antiviral medicine’s efficacy will be reduced if drug resistance is significant. As a result, an accurate and efficient drug resistance prediction will be extremely helpful in determining the best course of therapy. A model for predicting interactions between the COVID-19 virus and the host is proposed. COVID-19 was declared a pandemic in March 2020. SARS-CoV-2 is a coronavirus strain that was discovered in February 2020. The primary cause of SARS-CoV-2 virus infection in humans is protein-protein interactions (PPI). In this pandemic condition, predicting these interactions is also critical. For the PPI prediction between the virus and human proteins, multiple machine learning models are applied, which are then validated using biological tests. A machine learning strategy for viral genome classification provides a model for classifying distinct viral genomes based on the biological structure of each DNA sequence. This paradigm is used to classify viruses such as human papillomaviruses (HPV), hepatitis B viruses (HBV), and human immunodeficiency viruses type 1 (HIV-1). In this study, a novel platform called CASTOR is introduced for viral classification. All ten papers discussed here have proposed a good model for predicting virus-related characteristics. Each of these models implemented different machine learning methods for creating the machine learning model, so their accuracy also differs. One model predicts the types of HTLV viruses with an accuracy of 97%. Another model has an accuracy of 94.73% for predicting HPV risk types. The highest accuracy for predicting Hepatitis C is 89.17% using SVM. Another model measures sensitivity at 99.3% for predicting the pathogenicity of the influenza virus. A model provides 97% accuracy for predicting Influenza A infections. A model for predicting the presence of HIV virus in protein sequences has an accuracy of 88%. Another model predicts the coreceptors of HIV with an accuracy of 75.5%. The drug resistance model provides an accuracy greater than 95%. A model for predicting COVID-19 interactions has an accuracy above 72% for the ensemble method. Another model for viral genome classification achieves an accuracy of 91.74%. This comparison shows that all models predict results with at least an accuracy greater than 70%. A number of viruses are present all over the world. Not all of these viruses can be detected using machine learning technologies, but some can be detected using simple or complex machine learning techniques. In this study, various models for virus prediction are discussed, each using different machine learning concepts to improve the model. Common machine learning techniques like SVM, naive Bayes, neural networks, regression, AdaBoost, and bagging techniques are used for classification and prediction. Each model presents a number of algorithms with its own set of advantages, as well as disadvantages like time consumption. In the future, it is important to develop a new model that overcomes all these disadvantages.
